Statistical Science
2002, Vol. 17, No. 3, 235–255
Statistical Fraud Detection: A Review
Richard J. Bolton and David J. Hand
Abstract. Fraud is increasing dramatically with the expansion of modern
technology and the global superhighways of communication, resulting inthe loss of billions of dollars worldwide each year. Although preventiontechnologies are the best way to reduce fraud, fraudsters are adaptiveand, given time, will usually ﬁnd ways to circumvent such measures.
Methodologies for the detection of fraud are essential if we are to catch
fraudsters once fraud prevention has failed. Statistics and machine learningprovide effective technologies for fraud detection and have been appliedsuccessfully to detect activities such as money laundering, e-commerce creditcard fraud, telecommunications fraud and computer intrusion, to name but afew. We describe the tools available for statistical fraud detection and theareas in which fraud detection technologies are most used.
Key words and phrases: Fraud detection, fraud prevention, statistics,
machine learning, money laundering, computer intrusion, e-commerce, creditcards, telecommunications.
1. INTRODUCTION
The Concise Oxford Dictionary deﬁnes fraud as
“criminal deception; the use of false representations togain an unjust advantage.” Fraud is as old as humanityitself and can take an unlimited variety of different
forms. However, in recent years, the development of
new technologies (which have made it easier for us tocommunicate and helped increase our spending power)has also provided yet further ways in which criminals
may commit fraud. Traditional forms of fraudulent
behavior such as money laundering have become easierto perpetrate and have been joined by new kinds offraud such as mobile telecommunications fraud and
computer intrusion.
We begin by distinguishing between fraud pre-
vention and fraud detection. Fraud prevention de-
scribes measures to stop fraud from occurring in the
ﬁrst place. These include elaborate designs, ﬂuores-
cent ﬁbers, multitone drawings, watermarks, laminatedmetal strips and holographs on banknotes, personal
Richard J. Bolton is Research Associate in the Statistics
Section of the Department of Mathematics at Imperial
College. David J. Hand is Professor of Statistics inthe Department of Mathematics at Imperial College,London SW7 2BZ, United Kingdom (e-mail: r.bolton,d.j.hand@ic.ac.uk).identiﬁcation numbers for bankcards, Internet security
systems for credit card transactions, Subscriber Iden-
tity Module (SIM) cards for mobile phones, and pass-
words on computer systems and telephone bank ac-counts. Of course, none of these methods is perfect
and, in general, a compromise has to be struck between
expense and inconvenience (e.g., to a customer) on theone hand, and effectiveness on the other.
In contrast, fraud detection involves identifying fraud
as quickly as possible once it has been perpetrated.Fraud detection comes into play once fraud preven-
tion has failed. In practice, of course fraud detection
must be used continuously, as one will typically be un-aware that fraud prevention has failed. We can try to
prevent credit card fraud by guarding our cards assid-
uously, but if nevertheless the card’s details are stolen,then we need to be able to detect, as soon as possible,
that fraud is being perpetrated.
Fraud detection is a continuously evolving disci-
pline. Whenever it becomes known that one detection
method is in place, criminals will adapt their strate-
gies and try others. Of course, new criminals are alsoconstantly entering the ﬁeld. Many of them will not be
aware of the fraud detection methods which have been
successful in the past and will adopt strategies which
lead to identiﬁable frauds. This means that the earlier
detection tools need to be applied as well as the latestdevelopments.
235

236 R. J. BOLTON AND D. J. HAND
The development of new fraud detection methods
is made more difﬁcult by the fact that the exchangeof ideas in fraud detection is severely limited. It does
not make sense to describe fraud detection techniques
in great detail in the public domain, as this gives
criminals the information that they require to evade
detection. Data sets are not made available and resultsare often censored, making them difﬁcult to assess
(e.g., Leonard, 1993).
Many fraud detection problems involve huge data
sets that are constantly evolving. For example, the
credit card company Barclaycard carries approximately350 million transactions a year in the United King-
dom alone (Hand, Blunt, Kelly and Adams, 2000),
The Royal Bank of Scotland, which has the largest
credit card merchant acquiring business in Europe,
carries over a billion transactions a year and AT&Tcarries around 275 million calls each weekday (Cortes
and Pregibon, 1998). Processing these data sets in
a search for fraudulent transactions or calls requires
more than mere novelty of statistical model, and
also needs fast and efﬁcient algorithms: data mining
techniques are relevant. These numbers also indicate
the potential value of fraud detection: if 0.1% of a100 million transactions are fraudulent, each losing
the company just £10, then overall the company loses
£1 million.
Statistical tools for fraud detection are many and
varied, since data from different applications can bediverse in both size and type, but there are common
themes. Such tools are essentially based on comparing
the observed data with expected values, but expected
values can be derived in various ways, depending on
the context. They may be single numerical summariesof some aspect of behavior and they are often simple
graphical summaries in which an anomaly is readily
apparent, but they are also often more complex (multi-
variate) behavior proﬁles. Such behavior proﬁles may
be based on past behavior of the system being studied(e.g., the way a bank account has been previously used)
or be extrapolated from other similar systems. Things
are often further complicated by the fact that, in some
domains (e.g., trading on the stock market) a given ac-
tor may behave in a fraudulent manner some of the timeand not at other times.
Statistical fraud detection methods may be super-
vised orunsupervised . In supervised methods, samples
of both fraudulent and nonfraudulent records are used
to construct models which allow one to assign new ob-servations into one of the two classes. Of course, this
requires one to be conﬁdent about the true classes ofthe original data used to build the models. It also re-
quires that one has examples of both classes. Further-more, it can only be used to detect frauds of a type
which have previously occurred.
In contrast, unsupervised methods simply seek those
accounts, customers and so forth which are most
dissimilar from the norm. These can then be examinedmore closely. Outliers are a basic form of nonstandard
observation. Tools used for checking data quality can
be used, but the detection of accidental errors is a rather
different problem from the detection of deliberately
falsiﬁed data or data which accurately describe afraudulent pattern.
This leads us to note the fundamental point that we
can seldom be certain, by statistical analysis alone,
that a fraud has been perpetrated. Rather, the analysis
should be regarded as alerting us to the fact that an ob-servation is anomalous, or more likely to be fraudulent
than others, so that it can then be investigated in more
detail. One can think of the objective of the statisti-
cal analysis as being to return a suspicion score (where
we will regard a higher score as more suspicious than
a lower one). The higher the score is, then the more
unusual is the observation or the more like previouslyfraudulent values it is. The fact that there are many
different ways in which fraud can be perpetrated and
many different scenarios in which it can occur means
that there are many different ways to compute suspi-
cion scores.
Suspicion scores can be computed for each record in
the database (for each customer with a bank account or
credit card, for each owner of a mobile phone, for each
desktop computer and so on), and these can be updated
as time progresses. These scores can then be rankordered and investigative attention can be focussed on
those with the highest scores or on those which exhibit
a sudden increase. Here issues of cost enter: given that
it is too expensive to undertake a detailed investigation
of all records, one concentrates investigation on thosethought most likely to be fraudulent.
One of the difﬁculties with fraud detection is that
typically there are many legitimate records for each
fraudulent one. A detection method which correctly
identiﬁes 99% of the legitimate records as legitimateand 99% of the fraudulent records as fraudulent might
be regarded as a highly effective system. However, if
only 1 in 1000 records is fraudulent, then, on average,
in every 100 that the system ﬂags as fraudulent, only
about 9 will in fact be so. In particular, this meansthat to identify those 9 requires detailed examination of
all 100—at possibly considerable cost. This leads us to

STATISTICAL FRAUD DETECTION 237
a more general point: fraud can be reduced to as low a
level as one likes, but only by virtue of a correspondinglevel of effort and cost. In practice, some compromise
has to be reached, often a commercial compromise,
between the cost of detecting a fraud and the savingsto be made by detecting it. Sometimes the issues arecomplicated by, for example, the adverse publicity
accompanying fraud detection. At a business level,
revealing that a bank is a signiﬁcant target for fraud,even if much has been detected, does little to inspire
conﬁdence, and at a personal level, taking action which
implies to an innocent customer that they may besuspected of fraud is obviously detrimental to good
customer relations.
The body of this paper is structured according to
different areas of fraud detection. Clearly we cannot
hope to cover all areas in which statistical methods can
be applied. Instead, we have selected a few areas wheresuch methods are used and where there is a body of
expertise and of literature describing them. However,
before looking at the details of different applicationareas, Section 2 provides a brief overview of sometools for fraud detection.
2. FRAUD DETECTION TOOLS
As we mentioned above, fraud detection can be su-
pervised or unsupervised. Supervised methods use a
database of known fraudulent/legitimate cases from
which to construct a model which yields a suspicionscore for new cases. Traditional statistical classiﬁca-
tion methods (Hand, 1981; McLachlan, 1992), such
as linear discriminant analysis and logistic discrimina-tion, have proved to be effective tools for many appli-
cations, but more powerful tools (Ripley, 1996; Hand,
1997; Webb, 1999), especially neural networks, havealso been extensively applied. Rule-based methods aresupervised learning algorithms that produce classiﬁers
using rules of the form If{certain conditions}, Then
{a consequent}. Examples of such algorithms includeBAYES (Clark and Niblett, 1989), FOIL (Quinlan,
1990) and RIPPER (Cohen, 1995). Tree-based algo-
rithms such as CART (Breiman, Friedman, Olshen andStone, 1984) and C4.5 (Quinlan, 1993) produce classi-
ﬁers of a similar form. Combinations of some or all of
these algorithms can be created using meta-learning al-gorithms to improve prediction in fraud detection (e.g.,
Chan, Fan, Prodromidis and Stolfo, 1999).
Major considerations when building a supervised
tool for fraud detection include those of uneven classsizes and different costs of different types of misclas-
siﬁcation. We must also take into consideration thecosts of investigating observations and the beneﬁts of
identifying fraud. Moreover, often class membershipis uncertain. For example, credit transactions may be
labelled incorrectly: a fraudulent transaction may re-
main unobserved and thus be labeled legitimate (and
the extent of this may remain unknown) or a legit-
imate transaction may be misreported as fraudulent.Some work has addressed misclassiﬁcation of training
samples (e.g., Lachenbruch, 1966, 1974; Chhikara and
McKeon, 1984), but not in the context of fraud detec-
tion as far as we are aware. Issues such as these were
discussed by Chan and Stolfo (1998) and Provost andFawcett (2001).
Link analysis relates known fraudsters to other
individuals using record linkage and social network
methods (Wasserman and Faust, 1994). For example,
in telecommunications networks, security investigatorshave found that fraudsters seldom work in isolation
from each other. Also, after an account has been
disconnected for fraud, the fraudster will often call the
same numbers from another account (Cortes, Pregibon
and V olinsky, 2001). Telephone calls from an account
can thus be linked to fraudulent accounts to indicate
intrusion. A similar approach has been taken in moneylaundering (Goldberg and Senator, 1995, 1998; Senator
et al., 1995).
Unsupervised methods are used when there are no
prior sets of legitimate and fraudulent observations.
Techniques employed here are usually a combinationof proﬁling and outlier detection methods. We model
a baseline distribution that represents normal behav-
ior and then attempt to detect observations that show
the greatest departure from this norm. There are sim-
ilarities to author identiﬁcation in text analysis. Digitanalysis using Benford’s law is an example of such a
method. Benford’s law (Hill, 1995) says that the distri-
bution of the ﬁrst signiﬁcant digits of numbers drawn
from a wide variety of random distributions will have
(asymptotically) a certain form. Until recently, this lawwas regarded as merely a mathematical curiosity with
no apparent useful application. However, Nigrini and
Mittermaier (1997) and Nigrini (1999) showed that
Benford’s law can be used to detect fraud in accounting
data. The premise behind fraud detection using toolssuch as Benford’s law is that fabricating data which
conform to Benford’s law is difﬁcult.
Fraudsters adapt to new prevention and detection
measures, so fraud detection needs to be adaptive and
evolve over time. However, legitimate account usersmay gradually change their behavior over a longer
period of time and it is important to avoid spurious

238 R. J. BOLTON AND D. J. HAND
alarms. Models can be updated at ﬁxed time points or
continuously over time; see, for example, Burge andShawe-Taylor (1997), Fawcett and Provost (1997a),
Cortes, Pregibon and V olinsky (2001) and Senator
(2000).
Although the basic statistical models for fraud detec-
tion can be categorized as supervised or unsupervised,the application areas of fraud detection cannot be de-
scribed so conveniently. Their diversity is reﬂected in
their particular operational characteristics and the va-
riety and quantity of data available, both features that
drive the choice of a suitable fraud detection tool.
3. CREDIT CARD FRAUD
The extent of credit card fraud is difﬁcult to quan-
tify, partly because companies are often loath to re-lease fraud ﬁgures in case they frighten the spending
public and partly because the ﬁgures change (prob-
ably grow) over time. Various estimates have been
given. For example, Leonard (1993) suggested the cost
of Visa/Mastercard fraud in Canada in 1989, 1990and 1991 was $19, 29 and 46 million (Canadian), re-
spectively. Ghosh and Reilly (1994) suggested a ﬁg-
ure of $850 million (U.S.) per year for all types of
credit card fraud in the United States, and Aleskerov,
Freisleben and Rao (1997) cited estimates of $700 mil-
lion in the United States each year for Visa/Mastercard
and $10 billion worldwide in 1996. Microsoft’s Expe-dia set aside $6 million for credit card fraud in 1999
(Patient, 2000). Total losses through credit card fraud
in the United Kingdom have been growing rapidly over
the last 4 years [1997, £122 million; 1998, £135 mil-
lion; 1999, £188 million; 2000, £293 million. Source :
Association for Payment Clearing Services, London
(APACS)] and recently APACS reported £373.7 mil-
lion losses in the 12 months ending August 2001.
Jenkins (2000) says “for every £100 you spend on a
card in the UK, 13p is lost to fraudsters.” Matters arecomplicated by issues of exactly what one includes in
the fraud ﬁgures. For example, bankruptcy fraud arises
when the cardholder makes purchases for which he/she
has no intention of paying and then ﬁles for personal
bankruptcy, leaving the bank to cover the losses. Sincethese are generally regarded as charge-off losses, they
often are not included in fraud ﬁgures. However, they
can be substantial: Ghosh and Reilly (1994) cited one
estimate of $2.65 billion for bankruptcy fraud in 1992.
It is in a company and card issuer’s interests to
prevent fraud or, failing this, to detect fraud as soon
as possible. Otherwise consumer trust in both the cardand the company decreases and revenue is lost, in
addition to the direct losses made through fraudulentsales. Because of the potential for loss of sales due to
loss of conﬁdence, in general, the merchants assume
responsibility for fraud losses, even when the vendor
has obtained authorization from the card issuer.
Credit card fraud may be perpetrated in various ways
(a description of the credit card industry and how it
functions is given in Blunt and Hand, 2000), including
simple theft, application fraud and counterfeit cards.
In all of these, the fraudster uses a physical card, but
physical possession is not essential to perpetrate creditcard fraud: one of the major fraud areas is “cardholder-
not-present” fraud, where only the card’s details are
given (e.g., over the phone).
Use of a stolen card is perhaps the most straightfor-
ward type of credit card fraud. In this case, the fraud-ster typically spends as much as possible in as short a
space of time as possible, before the theft is detected
and the card is stopped; hence, detecting the theft early
can prevent large losses.
Application fraud arises when individuals obtain
new credit cards from issuing companies using false
personal information. Traditional credit scorecards(Hand and Henley, 1997) are used to detect customers
who are likely to default, and the reasons for this may
include fraud. Such scorecards are based on the de-
tails given on the application forms and perhaps also
on other details such as bureau information. Statisticalmodels which monitor behavior over time can be used
to detect cards which have been obtained from a fraud-
ulent application (e.g., a ﬁrst time card holder who runs
out and rapidly makes many purchases should arouse
suspicion). With application fraud, however, urgencyis not as important to the fraudster and it might not be
until accounts are sent out or repayment dates begin to
pass that fraud is suspected.
Cardholder-not-present fraud occurs when the trans-
action is made remotely, so that only the card’s detailsare needed, and a manual signature and card imprint
are not required at the time of purchase. Such transac-
tions include telephone sales and on-line transactions,
and this type of fraud accounts for a high proportion of
losses. To undertake such fraud it is necessary to obtainthe details of the card without the cardholder’s knowl-
edge. This is done in various ways, including “skim-
ming,” where employees illegally copy the magnetic
strip on a credit card by swiping it through a small
handheld card reader, “shoulder surfers,” who entercard details into a mobile phone while standing be-
hind a purchaser in a queue, and people posing as credit

STATISTICAL FRAUD DETECTION 239
card company employees taking details of credit card
transactions from companies over the phone. Counter-
feit cards, currently the largest source of credit card
fraud in the United Kingdom ( source : APACS), can
also be created using this information. Transactions
made by fraudsters using counterfeit cards and mak-
ing cardholder-not-present purchases can be detected
through methods which seek changes in transaction
patterns, as well as checking for particular patterns
which are known to be indicative of counterfeiting.
Credit card databases contain information on each
transaction. This information includes such things as
merchant code, account number, type of credit card,
type of purchase, client name, size of transaction and
date of transaction. Some of these data are numerical
(e.g., transaction size) and others are nominal categor-
ical (e.g., merchant code, which can have hundreds of
thousands of categories) or symbolic. The mixed data
types have led to the application of a wide variety of
statistical, machine learning and data mining tools.
Suspicion scores to detect whether an account has
been compromised can be based on models of individ-
ual customers’ previous usage patterns, standard ex-
pected usage patterns, particular patterns which are
known to be often associated with fraud, and on su-
pervised models. A simple example of the patterns ex-
hibited by individual customers is given in Figure 16 of
Hand and Blunt (2001), which shows how the slopes of
cumulative credit card spending over time are remark-ably linear. Sudden jumps in these curves or sudden
changes of slope (transaction or expenditure rate sud-
denly exceeding some threshold) merit investigation.
Likewise, some customers practice “jam jarring”—
restricting particular cards to particular types of pur-
chases (e.g., using a given card for petrol purchases
only and a different one for supermarket purchases),
so that usage of a card to make an unusual type of pur-
chase can trigger an alarm for such customers. At a
more general level, suspicion scores can also be based
on expected overall usage proﬁles. For example, ﬁrst
time credit card users are typically initially fairly ten-
tative in their usage, whereas those transferring loans
from another card are generally not so reticent. Fi-
nally, examples of overall transaction patterns known
to be intrinsically suspicious are the sudden purchase
of many small electrical items or jewelry (goods which
permit easy black market resale) and the immediate use
of a new card in a wide range of different locations.
We commented above that, for obvious reasons,
there is a dearth of published literature on fraud de-
tection. Much of that which has been published ap-
pears in the methodological data analytic literature,where the aim is to illustrate new data analytic tools by
applying them to the detection of fraud, rather thanto describe methods of fraud detection per se. Fur-
thermore, since anomaly detection methods are very
context dependent, much of the published literature
in the area concentrates on supervised classiﬁcation
methods. In particular, rule-based systems and neuralnetworks have attracted interest. Researchers who have
used neural networks for credit card fraud detection
include Ghosh and Reilly (1994), Aleskerov et al.
(1997), Dorronsoro, Ginel, Sanchez and Cruz (1997)
and Brause, Langsdorf and Hepp (1999), mainly in thecontext of supervised classiﬁcation. HNC Software has
developed Falcon , a software package that relies heav-
ily on neural network technology to detect credit card
fraud.
Supervised methods, using samples from the fraud-
ulent/nonfraudulent classes as the basis to construct
classiﬁcation rules to detect future cases of fraud, suf-
fer from the problem of unbalanced class sizes men-
tioned above: the legitimate transactions generally far
outnumber the fraudulent ones. Brause, Langsdorf and
Hepp (1999) said that, in their database of credit
card transactions, “the probability of fraud is verylow (0.2%) and has been lowered in a preprocessing
step by a conventional fraud detecting system down
to 0.1%.” Hassibi (2000) remarked that “out of some
12 billion transactions made annually, approximately
10 million—or one out of every 1200 transactions—turn out to be fraudulent. Also, 0.04% (4 out of every
10,000) of all monthly active accounts are fraudulent.”
It follows from this sort of ﬁgure that simple mis-
classiﬁcation rate cannot be used as a performance
measure: with a bad rate of 0.1%, simply classifyingevery transaction as legitimate will yield an error rate
of only 0.001. Instead, one must either minimize an
appropriate cost-weighted loss or ﬁx some parameter
(such as the number of cases one can afford to investi-
gate in detail) and then try to maximize the number offraudulent cases detected subject to the constraints.
Stolfo et al. (1997a, b) outlined a meta-classiﬁer
system for detecting credit card fraud that is based
on the idea of using different local fraud detection
tools within each different corporate environment andmerging the results to yield a more accurate global
tool. This work was elaborated in Chan and Stolfo
(1998), Chan, Fan, Prodromidis and Stolfo (1999) and
Stolfo et al. (1999), who described a more realistic
cost model to accompany the different classiﬁcationoutcomes. Wheeler and Aitken (2000) also explored
the combination of multiple classiﬁcation rules.

240 R. J. BOLTON AND D. J. HAND
4. MONEY LAUNDERING
Money laundering is the process of obscuring the
source, ownership or use of funds, usually cash, thatare the proﬁts of illicit activity. The size of the problem
is indicated in a 1995 U.S. Ofﬁce of Technology As-
sessment (OTA) report (U.S. Congress, 1995): “Fed-eral agencies estimate that as much as $300 billion is
laundered annually, worldwide. From $40 billion to
$80 billion of this may be drug proﬁts made in theUnited States.” Prevention is attempted by means of le-
gal constraints and requirements—the burden of which
is gradually increasing—and there has been much de-bate recently about the use of encryption. However, no
prevention strategy is foolproof and detection is essen-
tial. In particular, the September 11th terrorist attackson New York City and the Pentagon have focused at-
tention on the detection of money laundering in an
attempt to starve terrorist networks of funds.
Wire transfers provide a natural domain for launder-
ing: according to the OTA report, each day in 1995
about half a million wire transfers, valued at more than$2 trillion (U.S.), were carried out using the Fedwire
and CHIPS systems, along with almost a quarter of a
million transfers using the SWIFT system. It is esti-mated that around 0.05–0.1% of these transactions in-
volved laundering. Sophisticated statistical and other
on-line data analytic procedures are needed to detectsuch laundering activity. Since it is now becoming a le-
gal requirement to show that all reasonable means have
been used to detect fraud, we may expect to see evengreater application of such tools.
Wire transfers contain items such as date of transfer,
identity of sender, routing number of originating bank,identity of recipient, routing number of recipient bank
and amount transferred. Sometimes those ﬁelds not
needed for transfer are left blank, free text ﬁelds maybe completed in different ways and, worse still, but
inevitable, sometimes the data have errors. Automatic
error detection (and correction) software has beendeveloped, based on semantic and syntactic constraints
on possible content, but, of course, this can never
be a complete solution. Matters are also complicatedby the fact that banks do not share their data. Of
course, banks are not the only bodies that transfer
money electronically, and other businesses have beenestablished precisely for this purpose [the OTA report
(U.S. Congress, 1995) estimates the number of such
businesses as 200,000].
The detection of money laundering presents difﬁcul-
ties not encountered in areas such as, for example, thecredit card industry. Whereas credit card fraud comes
to light fairly early on, in money laundering it may beyears before individual transfers or accounts are deﬁn-
itively and legally identiﬁed as part of a laundering
process. While, in principle (assuming records have
been kept), one could go back and trace the relevant
transactions, in practice not all of them would be iden-tiﬁed, so detracting from their use in supervised de-
tection methods. Furthermore, there is typically less
extensive information available for the account hold-
ers in investment banks than there is in retail banking
operations. Developing more detailed customer recordsystems might be a good way forward.
As with other areas of fraud, money laundering
detection works hand in hand with prevention. In 1970,
for example, in the United States the Bank Secrecy
Act required that banks report all currency transactionsof over $10,000 to the authorities. However, also
as in other areas of fraud, the perpetrators adapt
their modus operandi to match the changing tactics
of the authorities. So, following the requirement of
banks to report currency transactions of over $10,000,
the obvious strategy was developed to divide larger
sums into multiple amounts of less than $10,000 anddeposit them in different banks (a practice termed
smurﬁng orstructuring ). In the United States, this is
now illegal, but the way the money launderers adapt
to the prevailing detection methods can lead one to
the pessimistic perspective that only the incompetentmoney launderers are detected. This, clearly, also
limits the value of supervised detection methods: the
patterns detected will be those patterns which were
characteristic of fraud in the past, but which may
no longer be so. Other strategies used by moneylaunderers which limit the value of supervised methods
include switching between wire and physical cash
movements, the creation of shell businesses, false
invoicing and, of course, the fact that a single transfer,
in itself, is unlikely to appear to be a launderingtransaction. Furthermore, because of the large sums
involved, money launderers are highly professional and
often have contacts in the banks who can feed back
details of the detection strategies being applied.
The number of currency transactions over $10,000
in value increased dramatically after the mid-1980s,
to the extent that the number of reports ﬁled is huge
(over 10 million in 1994, with total worth of around
$500 billion), and this in itself can cause difﬁculties.
In an attempt to cope with this, the Financial CrimesEnforcement Network (FinCEN) of the U.S. Depart-
ment of the Treasury processes all such reports using

STATISTICAL FRAUD DETECTION 241
the FinCEN artiﬁcial intelligence system (FAIS) de-
scribed below. More generally, banks are also requiredto report any suspicious transactions, and about 0.5%
of currency transaction reports are so ﬂagged.
Money laundering involves three steps:
1.Placement : the introduction of the cash into the
banking system or legitimate business (e.g., trans-
ferring the banknotes obtained from retail drugstransactions into a cashier’s cheque). One way
to do this is to pay vastly inﬂated amounts for
goods imported across international frontiers. Pak
and Zdanowicz (1994) described statistical analy-
sis of trade databases to detect anomalies in gov-ernment trade data such as charging $1694 a gram
for imports of the drug erythromycin compared with
$0.08 a gram for exports.
2.Layering : carrying out multiple transactions
through multiple accounts with different owners at
different ﬁnancial institutions in the legitimate ﬁ-
nancial system.
3.Integration : merging the funds with money obtained
from legitimate activities.
Detection strategies can be targeted at various lev-
els. In general (and in common with some other ar-
eas in which fraud is perpetrated), it is very difﬁcult or
impossible to characterize an individual transaction as
fraudulent. Rather transaction patterns must be iden-
tiﬁed as fraudulent or suspicious. A single deposit of
just under $10,000 is not suspicious, but multiple such
deposits are; a large sum being deposited is not sus-picious, but a large sum being deposited and instantly
withdrawn is. In fact, one can distinguish several levels
of (potential) analysis: the individual transaction level,
the account level, the business level (and, indeed, indi-
viduals may have multiple accounts) and the “ring” ofbusinesses level. Analyses can be targeted at particular
levels, but more complex approaches can examine sev-
eral levels simultaneously. (There is an analogy here
with speech recognition systems: simple systems fo-
cused at the individual phoneme and word levels arenot as effective as those which try to recognize these
elements in a higher level context of the way words
are put together when used.) In general, link analy-sis, which identiﬁes groups of participants involved
in transactions, plays a key role in most money laun-
dering detection strategies. Senator et al. (1995) said
“Money laundering typically involves a multitude of
transactions, perhaps by distinct individuals, into mul-tiple accounts with different owners at different banks
and other ﬁnancial institutions. Detection of large-scalemoney laundering schemes requires the ability to re-
construct these patterns of transactions by linking po-tentially related transactions and then to distinguish
the legitimate sets of transactions from the illegitimate
ones. This technique of ﬁnding relationships between
elements of information, called link analysis , is the pri-
mary analytic technique used in law enforcement in-telligence (Andrews and Peterson, 1990).” An obvi-
ous and simplistic illustration is the fact that a transac-
tion with a known criminal may rouse suspicion. More
subtle methods are based on recognition of the sort
of businesses with which money laundering operationstransact. Of course, these are all supervised methods
and are subject to the weaknesses that those responsi-
ble may evolve their strategies. Similar tools are used
to detect telecom fraud, as outlined in the following
section.
Rule-based systems have been developed, often
with the rules based on experience (“ﬂag transactions
from countries X and Y”; “ﬂag accounts showing
a large deposit followed immediately by a similar
sized withdrawal”). Structuring can be detected by
computing the cumulative sum of amounts entering
an account over a short window, such as a day. Othermethods have been developed based on straightforward
descriptive statistics, such as rate of transactions and
proportion of transactions which are suspicious. The
use of the Benford distribution is an extension of this
idea. Although one may not usually be interested indetecting changes in an account’s behavior, methods
such as peer group analysis (Bolton and Hand, 2001)
and break detection (Goldberg and Senator, 1997) can
be applied to detect money laundering.
One of the most elaborate money laundering detec-
tion systems is the U.S. Financial Crimes Enforcement
Network AI system (FAIS) described in Senator et al.
(1995) and Goldberg and Senator (1998). This system
allows users to follow trails of linked transactions. It
is built around a “blackboard” architecture, in whichprogram modules can read and write to a central data-
base that contains details of transactions, subjects and
accounts. A key component of the system is its suspi-
cion score. This is a rule-based system based on an ear-
lier system developed by the U.S. Customs Service inthe mid-1980s. The system computes suspicion scores
for various different types of transaction and activity.
Simple Bayesian updating is used to combine evidence
that suggests that a transaction or activity is illicit to
yield an overall suspicion score. Senator et al. (1995)included a brief but interesting discussion of an inves-
tigation of whether case-based reasoning (cf. nearest

242 R. J. BOLTON AND D. J. HAND
neighbor methods) and classiﬁcation tree techniques
could usefully be added to the system.
The American National Association of Securities
Dealers, Inc., uses an advanced detection system (ADS;
Kirkland et al., 1998; Senator, 2000) to ﬂag “patterns
or practices of regulatory concern.” ADS uses a rule
pattern matcher and a time-sequence pattern matcher,and (like FAIS) places great emphasis on visualization
tools. Also as with FAIS, data mining techniques are
used to identify new patterns of potential interest.
A different approach to detecting similar fraudu-
lent behavior is taken by SearchSpace Ltd. (www.searchspace.com), which has developed a system for
the London Stock Exchange called MonITARS (moni-
toring insider trading and regulatory surveillance) that
combines genetic algorithms, fuzzy logic and neural
network technology to detect insider dealing and mar-
ket manipulation. Chartier and Spillane (2000) also
described an application of neural networks to detectmoney laundering.
5. TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRAUD
The telecommunications industry has expanded dra-
matically in the last few years with the development
of affordable mobile phone technology. With the in-
creasing number of mobile phone users, global mo-
bile phone fraud is also set to rise. Various estimates
have been presented for the cost of this fraud. For ex-ample, Cox, Eick, Wills and Brachman (1997) gave a
ﬁgure of $1 billion a year. Telecom and Network Secu-
rity Review [4(5) April 1997] gave a ﬁgure of between
4 and 6% of U.S. telecom revenue lost due to fraud.
Cahill, Lambert, Pinheiro and Sun (2002) suggestedthat international ﬁgures are worse, with “several new
service providers reporting losses over 20%.” Moreau
et al. (1996) gave a value of “several million ECUs per
year.” Presumably this refers to within the European
Union and, given the size of the other estimates, wewonder if this should be billions. According to a re-
cent report (Neural Technologies, 2000), “the industry
already reports a loss of £13 billion each year due to
fraud.” Mobile Europe (2000) gave a ﬁgure of $13 bil-
lion (U.S.). The latter article also claimed that it is es-timated that fraudsters can steal up to 5% of some op-
erators’ revenues, and that some expect telecom fraud
as a whole to reach $28 billion per year within 3 years.
Despite the variety in these ﬁgures, it is clear that
they are all very large. Apart from the fact that theyare simply estimates, and hence subject to expected
inaccuracies and variability based on the informationused to derive them, there are other reasons for the
differences. One is the distinction between hard andsoft currency. Hard currency is real money, paid by
someone other than the perpetrator for the service
the perpetrator has stolen. Hynninen (2000) gave the
example of the sum one mobile phone operator will
pay another for the use of their network. Soft currencyis the value of the service the perpetrator has stolen.
At least part of this is only a loss if one assumes that
the thief would have used the same service even if he
or she had had to pay for it. Another reason for the
differences derives from the fact that such estimatesmay be used for different purposes. Hynninen (2000)
gave the examples of operators giving estimates on
the high side, hoping for more stringent antifraud
legislation, and operators giving estimates on the low
side to encourage customer conﬁdence.
We need to distinguish between fraud aimed at
the service provider and fraud enabled bythe service
provider. An example of the former is the resale
of stolen call time and an example of the latter is
interfering with telephone banking instructions. (It is
the possibility of the latter sort of fraud which makes
the public wary of using their credit cards over theInternet.) We can also distinguish between revenue
fraud and nonrevenue fraud. The aim of the former is
to make money for the perpetrator, while the aim of the
latter is simply to obtain a service free of charge (or,
as with computer hackers, e.g., the simple challengerepresented by the system).
There are many different types of telecom fraud (see,
e.g., Shawe-Taylor et al., 2000) and these can occur at
various levels. The two most prevalent types are sub-
scription fraud and superimposed or “surﬁng” fraud.Subscription fraud occurs when the fraudster obtains a
subscription to a service, often with false identity de-
tails, with no intention of paying. This is thus at the
level of a phone number—all transactions from this
number will be fraudulent. Superimposed fraud is theuse of a service without having the necessary authority
and is usually detected by the appearance of phantom
calls on a bill. There are several ways to carry out su-
perimposed fraud, including mobile phone cloning and
obtaining calling card authorization details. Superim-posed fraud will generally occur at the level of indi-
vidual calls—the fraudulent calls will be mixed in with
the legitimate ones. Subscription fraud will generally
be detected at some point through the billing process—
although the aim is to detect it well before that, sincelarge costs can quickly be run up. Superimposed fraud
can remain undetected for a long time. The distinction

STATISTICAL FRAUD DETECTION 243
between these two types of fraud follows a similar dis-
tinction in credit card fraud.
Other types of telecom fraud include “ghosting”
(technology that tricks the network so as to obtain freecalls) and insider fraud, where telecom company em-
ployees sell information to criminals that can be ex-
ploited for fraudulent gain. This, of course, is a univer-sal cause of fraud, whatever the domain. “Tumbling”is a type of superimposed fraud in which rolling fake
serial numbers are used on cloned handsets, so that
successive calls are attributed to different legitimatephones. The chance of detection by spotting unusualpatterns is small and the illicit phone will operate un-til all of the assumed identities have been spotted. The
term “spooﬁng” is sometimes used to describe users
pretending to be someone else.
Telecommunications networks generate vast quanti-
ties of data, sometimes on the order of several giga-bytes per day, so that data mining techniques are of
particular importance. The 1998 database of AT&T, for
example, contained 350 million proﬁles and processed275 million call records per day (Cortes and Pregibon,1998).
As with other fraud domains, apart from some do-
main speciﬁc tools, methods for detection hinge around
outlier detection and supervised classiﬁcation, eitherusing rule-based methods or based on comparing sta-tistically derived suspicion scores with some thresh-old. At a low level, simple rule-based detection sys-
tems use rules such as the apparent use of the same
phone in two very distant geographical locations inquick succession, calls which appear to overlap in time,and very high value and very long calls. At a higherlevel, statistical summaries of call distributions (of-
ten called proﬁles orsignatures at the user level) are
compared with thresholds determined either by expertsor by application of supervised learning methods toknown fraud/nonfraud cases. Murad and Pinkas (1999)
and Rosset et al. (1999) distinguished between proﬁl-
ing at the levels of individual calls, daily call patternsand overall call patterns, and described what are effec-tively outlier detection methods for detecting anom-alous behavior. A particularly interesting description
of proﬁling methods was given by Cortes and Pregibon
(1998). Cortes, Fisher, Pregibon and Rogers (2000) de-scribed the Hancock language for writing programs
for processing proﬁles, basing the signatures on suchquantities as average call duration, longest call dura-
tion, number of calls to particular regions in the last
day and so on. Proﬁling and classiﬁcation techniquesalso were described by Fawcett and Provost (1997a, b,
1999) and Moreau, Verrelst and Vandewalle (1997).Some work (see, e.g., Fawcett and Provost, 1997a) hasfocused on detecting changes in behavior.
A general complication is that signatures and thresh-
olds may need to depend on time of day, type of ac-
count and so on, and that they will probably need tobe updated over time. Cahill et al. (2002) suggestedexcluding the very suspicious scores in this updating
process, although more work is needed in this area.
Once again, neural networks have been widely used.
The main fraud detection software of the FraudSolutions Unit of Nortel Networks (Nortel, 2000) usesa combination of proﬁling and neural networks. Like-
wise, ASPeCT (Moreau et al., 1996; Shawe-Taylor
et al., 2000), a project of the European Commis-sion, V odaphone, other European telecom compa-nies and academics, developed a combined rule-basedproﬁling and neural network approach. Taniguchi,
Haft, Hollmén and Tresp (1998) described neural net-
works, mixture models and Bayesian networks intelecom fraud detection based on call records storedfor billing.
Link analysis, with links updated over time, estab-
lishes the “communities of interest” (Cortes, Pregi-
bon and V olinsky, 2001) that can indicate networks offraudsters. These methods are based on the observationthat fraudsters seldom change their calling habits, butare often closely linked to other fraudsters. Using sim-
ilar patterns of transactions to infer the presence of a
particular fraudster is in the spirit of phenomenal datamining (McCarthy, 2000).
Visualization methods (Cox et al., 1997), developed
for mining very large data sets, have also been devel-
oped for use in telecom fraud detection. Here human
pattern recognition skills interact with graphical com-puter display of quantities of calls between differentsubscribers in various geographical locations. A possi-
ble future scenario would be to code into software the
patterns which humans detect.
The telecom market will become even more compli-
cated over time—with more opportunity for fraud. Atpresent the extent of fraud is measured by consider-
ing factors such as call lengths and tariffs. The third
generation of mobile phone technology will also needto take into account such things as the content of thecalls (because of the packet switching technology used,equally long data transmissions may contain very dif-
ferent numbers of data packets) and the priority of the
call.

244 R. J. BOLTON AND D. J. HAND
6. COMPUTER INTRUSION
On Thursday, September 21, 2000, a 16-year-old
boy was jailed for hacking into both the Pentagon andNASA computer systems. Between the 14th and 25th
of October 2000 Microsoft security tracked the illegal
activity of a hacker on the Microsoft Corporate Net-work. These examples illustrate that even exception-
ally well protected domains can have their computer
security compromised.
Computer intrusion fraud is big business and com-
puter intrusion detection is a hugely intensive area of
research. Hackers can ﬁnd passwords, read and changeﬁles, alter source code, read e-mails and so on. Den-
ning (1997) listed eight kinds of computer intrusion. If
the hackers can be prevented from penetrating the com-puter system or can be detected early enough, then such
crime can be virtually eliminated. However, as with all
fraud when the prizes are high, the attacks are adaptiveand once one kind of intrusion has been recognized the
hacker will try a different route. Because of its impor-
tance, a great deal of effort has been put into develop-ing intrusion detection methods, and there are several
commercial products available, including Cisco secure
intrusion detection system (CSIDS, 1999) and next-generation intrusion detection expert system (NIDES;
Anderson, Frivold and Valdes, 1995).
Since the only record of a hacker’s activities is the
sequence of commands that is used when compromis-
ing the system, analysts of computer intrusion data pre-
dominantly use sequence analysis techniques. As withother fraud situations, both supervised and unsuper-
vised methods are used. In the context of intrusion de-
tection, supervised methods are sometimes called mis-
use detection , while the unsupervised methods used
are generally methods of anomaly detection, based on
proﬁles of usage patterns for each legitimate user. Su-pervised methods have the problem described in other
contexts, that they can, of course, only work on intru-
sion patterns which have already occurred (or partialmatches to these). Lee and Stolfo (1998) applied clas-
siﬁcation techniques to data from a user or program
that has been identiﬁed as either normal or abnormal.Lippmann et al. (2000) concluded that emphasis should
be placed on developing methods for detecting new
patterns of intrusion rather than old patterns, but Ku-mar and Spafford (1994) remarked that “a majority of
break-ins ...are the result of a small number of known
attacks, as evidenced by reports from response teams(e.g., CERT). Automating detection of these attacks
should therefore result in the detection of a signiﬁcantnumber of break-in attempts.” Shieh and Gligor (1991,
1997) described a pattern-matching method and arguedthat it is more effective than statistical methods at de-
tecting known types of intrusion, but is unable to de-
tect novel kinds of intrusion patterns, which could be
detected by statistical methods.
Since intrusion represents behavior and the aim is
to distinguish between intrusion behavior and usual
behavior in sequences, Markov models have naturally
been applied (e.g., Ju and Vardi, 2001). Qu et al.
(1998) also used probabilities of events to deﬁne
the proﬁle. Forrest, Hofmeyr, Somayaji and Longstaff(1996) described a method based on how natural
immune systems distinguish between self and alien
patterns. As with telecom data, both individual user
patterns and overall network behavior change over
time, so that a detection system must be able to adapt
to changes, but not adapt so rapidly that it also accepts
intrusions as legitimate changes. Lane and Brodley(1998) and Kosoresow and Hofmeyr (1997) also used
similarity of sequences that can be interpreted in a
probabilistic framework.
Inevitably, neural networks have been used: Ryan,
Lin and Miikkulainen (1997) performed proﬁling bytraining a neural network on the process data and
also referenced other neural approaches. In one of the
more careful studies in the area, Schonlau et al. (2001)
described a comparative study of six statistical ap-
proaches for detecting impersonation of other users(masquerading), where they took real usage data from
50 users and planted contaminating data from other
users to serve as the masquerade targets to be detected.
A nice overview of statistical issues in computer intru-
sion detection was given by Marchette (2001), and theOctober 2000 edition of Computer Networks [34(4)] is
a special issue on (relatively) recent advances in intru-
sion detection systems, including several examples of
new approaches to computer intrusion detection.
7. MEDICAL AND SCIENTIFIC FRAUD
Medical fraud can occur at various levels. It can oc-
cur in clinical trials (see, e.g., Buyse et al., 1999). It can
also occur in a more commercial context: for example,prescription fraud, submitting claims for patients who
are dead or who do not exist, and upcoding, where a
doctor performs a medical procedure, but charges the
insurer for one that is more expensive, or perhaps does
not even perform one at all. Allen (2000) gave an ex-ample of bills submitted for more than 24 hours in a
working day. He, Wang, Graco and Hawkins (1997)

STATISTICAL FRAUD DETECTION 245
and He, Graco and Yao (1999) described the use of
neural networks, genetic algorithms and nearest neigh-bor methods to classify the practice proﬁles of general
practitioners in Australia into classes from normal to
abnormal.
Medical fraud is often linked to insurance fraud:
Terry Allen, a statistician with the Utah Bureau ofMedicaid Fraud, estimated that up to 10% of the
$800 million annual claims may be stolen (Allen,
2000). Major and Riedinger (1992) created a know-
ledge/statistical-based system to detect healthcare
fraud by comparing observations with those withwhich they should be most similar (e.g., having simi-
lar geodemographics). Brockett, Xia and Derrig (1998)
used neural networks to classify fraudulent and non-
fraudulent claims for automobile bodily injury in
healthcare insurance claims. Glasgow (1997) gave a
short discussion of risk and fraud in the insurance in-
dustry. A glossary of several of the different types ofmedical fraud is available at http://www.motherjones.
com/mother_jones/MA95/davis2.html.
Of course, medicine is not the only scientiﬁc area
where data have sometimes been fabricated, falsiﬁed
or carefully selected to support a pet theory. Problemsof fraud in science are attracting increased attention,
but they have always been with us: errant scientists
have been known to massage ﬁgures from experiments
to push through development of a product or reach a
magical signiﬁcance level for a publication. DmitriyYuryev described such a case on his webpages at
http://www.orc.ru/ ∼yur77/statfr.htm. Moreover, there
are many classical cases in which the data have
been suspected of being massaged (including the
work of Galileo, Newton, Babbage, Kepler, Mendel,Millikan and Burt). Press and Tanur (2001) presented
a fascinating discussion of the role of subjectivity in
the scientiﬁc process, illustrating with many examples.
The borderline between subconscious selection of data
and out-and-out distortion is a ﬁne one.
8. CONCLUSIONS
The areas we have outlined are perhaps those in
which statistical and other data analytic tools havemade the most impact on fraud detection. This is typi-
cally because there are large quantities of information,
and this information is numerical or can easily be con-
verted into the numerical in the form of counts and pro-
portions. However, other areas, not mentioned above,have also used statistical tools for fraud detection. Ir-
regularities in ﬁnancial statements can be used to detectaccounting and management fraud in contexts broader
than those of money laundering. Digit analysis toolshave found favor in accountancy (e.g., Nigrini and
Mittermaier, 1997; Nigrini, 1999). Statistical sampling
methods are important in ﬁnancial audit, and screen-
ing tools are applied to decide which tax returns merit
detailed investigation. We mentioned insurance fraudin the context of medicine, but it clearly occurs more
widely. Artís, Ayuso and Guillén (1999) described an
approach to modelling fraud behavior in car insurance,
and Fanning, Cogger and Srivastava (1995) and Green
and Choi (1997) examined neural network classiﬁca-tion methods for detecting management fraud. Statis-
tical tools for fraud detection have also been applied
to sporting events. For example, Robinson and Tawn
(1995), Smith (1997) and Barao and Tawn (1999) ex-
amined the results of running events to see if some ex-ceptional times were out of line with what might be
expected.
Plagiarism is also a type of fraud. We brieﬂy referred
to the use of statistical tools for author veriﬁcation
and such methods can be applied here. However,
statistical tools can also be applied more widely.
For example, with the evolution of the Internet it isextremely easy for students to plagiarize articles and
pass them off as their own in school or university
coursework. The website http://www.plagiarism.org
describes a system that can take a manuscript and
compare it against their “substantial database” ofarticles from the Web. A statistical measure of the
originality of the manuscript is returned.
As we commented in the Introduction, fraud detec-
tion is a post hoc strategy, being applied after fraud
prevention has failed. Statistical tools are also appliedin some fraud prevention methods. For example, so-
called biometric methods of fraud detection are slowly
becoming more widespread. These include computer-
ized ﬁngerprint and retinal identiﬁcation, and also face
recognition (although this has received most publicityin the context of recognizing football hooligans).
In many of the applications we have discussed, speed
of processing is of the essence. This is particularly the
case in transaction processing, especially with telecom
and intrusion data, where vast numbers of records areprocessed every day, but also applies in credit card,
banking and retail sectors.
A key issue in all of this work is how effective the
statistical tools are in detecting fraud and a fundamen-
tal problem is that one typically does not know howmany fraudulent cases slip through the net. In applica-
tions such as banking fraud and telecom fraud, where

246 R. J. BOLTON AND D. J. HAND
speed of detection matters, measures such as average
time to detection after fraud starts (in minutes, num-bers of transactions, etc.) should also be reported. Mea-sures of this aspect interact with measures of ﬁnal de-tection rate: in many situations an account, telephoneand so forth, will have to be used for several fraudulenttransactions before it is detected as fraudulent, so thatseveral false negative classiﬁcations will necessarily bemade.
An appropriate overall strategy is to use a graded
system of investigation. Accounts with very highsuspicion scores merit immediate and intensive (and
expensive) investigation, while those with large but
less dramatic scores merit closer (but not expensive)observation. Once again, it is a matter of choosing asuitable compromise.
Finally, it is worth repeating the conclusions reached
by Schonlau et al. (2001), in the context of statisti-cal tools for computer intrusion detection: “statisticalmethods can detect intrusions, even in difﬁcult circum-stances,” but also “many challenges and opportunitiesfor statistics and statisticians remain.” We believe thispositive conclusion holds more generally. Fraud detec-tion is an important area, one in many ways ideal forthe application of statistical and data analytic tools, andone where statisticians can make a very substantial andimportant contribution.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work of Richard Bolton was supported by
a ROPA award from the Engineering and PhysicalSciences Research Council of the United Kingdom.
REFERENCES
ALESKEROV ,E . ,F REISLEBEN ,B .a n dR AO, B. (1997). CARD-
WATCH: A neural network based database mining system for
credit card fraud detection. In Computational Intelligence for
Financial Engineering. Proceedings of the IEEE/IAFE 220–
226. IEEE, Piscataway, NJ.
ALLEN , T. (2000). A day in the life of a Medicaid fraud statistician.
Stats 2920–22.
ANDERSON ,D . ,F RIVOLD ,T .a n dV ALDES , A. (1995). Next-
generation intrusion detection expert system (NIDES): A sum-mary. Technical Report SRI-CSL-95-07, Computer ScienceLaboratory, SRI International, Menlo Park, CA.
A
NDREWS ,P .P .a n dP ETERSON , M. B., eds. (1990). Criminal
Intelligence Analysis . Palmer Enterprises, Loomis, CA.
ARTÍS ,M . ,A YUSO ,M .a n dG UILLÉN , M. (1999). Modelling
different types of automobile insurance fraud behaviour in theSpanish market. Insurance Mathematics and Economics 24
67–81.B
ARAO ,M .I .a n dT AWN , J. A. (1999). Extremal analysis of short
series with outliers: Sea-levels and athletics records. Appl.
Statist. 48469–487.
BLUNT ,G .a n dH AND , D. J. (2000). The UK credit card market.
Technical report, Dept. Mathematics, Imperial College, Lon-don.
B
OLTON ,R .J .a n dH AND , D. J. (2001). Unsupervised proﬁling
methods for fraud detection. In Conference on Credit Scoring
and Credit Control 7, Edinburgh, UK, 5–7 Sept.
BRAUSE ,R . ,L ANGSDORF ,T .a n dH EPP, M. (1999). Neural data
mining for credit card fraud detection. In Proceedings of the
11th IEEE International Conference on Tools with Artiﬁcial
Intelligence 103–106. IEEE Computer Society Press, Silver
Spring, MD.
BREIMAN ,L . ,F RIEDMAN ,J .H . ,O LSHEN ,R .A .a n d
STONE , C. J. (1984). Classiﬁcation and Regression Trees .
Wadsworth, Belmont, CA.
BROCKETT ,P .L . ,X IA,X .a n dD ERRIG , R. A. (1998). Using
Kohonen’s self-organising feature map to uncover automobile
bodily injury claims fraud. The Journal of Risk and Insurance
65245–274.
BURGE ,P .a n dS HAWE -TAYLOR , J. (1997). Detecting cellular
fraud using adaptive prototypes. In AAAI Workshop on AI
Approaches to Fraud Detection and Risk Management 9–13.
AAAI Press, Menlo Park, CA.
BUYSE ,M . ,G EORGE ,S .L . ,E V ANS ,S . ,G ELLER ,N .L . ,
RANSTAM ,J . ,S CHERRER ,B . ,L ESAFFRE ,E . ,M URRAY ,G . ,
EDLER ,L . ,H UTTON ,J . ,C OLTON ,T . ,L ACHENBRUCH ,P .
and V ERMA , B. L. (1999). The role of biostatistics in the
prevention, detection and treatment of fraud in clinical trials.Statistics in Medicine 183435–3451.
C
AHILL ,M .H . ,L AMBERT ,D . ,P INHEIRO ,J .C .a n dS UN,D .X .
(2002). Detecting fraud in the real world. In Handbook of Mas-
sive Datasets (J. Abello, P. M. Pardalos and M. G. C. Resende,
eds.). Kluwer, Dordrecht.
CHAN ,P .K . ,F AN,W . ,P RODROMIDIS ,A .L .a n dS TOLFO ,S .J .
(1999). Distributed data mining in credit card fraud detection.IEEE Intelligent Systems 14(6) 67–74.
C
HAN ,P .a n dS TOLFO , S. (1998). Toward scalable learning
with non-uniform class and cost distributions: A case study
in credit card fraud detection. In Proceedings of the Fourth
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and DataMining 164–168. AAAI Press, Menlo Park, CA.
C
HARTIER ,B .a n dS PILLANE , T. (2000). Money laundering
detection with a neural network. In Business Applications of
Neural Networks (P. J. G. Lisboa, A. Vellido and B. Edisbury,
eds.) 159–172. World Scientiﬁc, Singapore.
CHHIKARA ,R .S .a n dM CKEON, J. (1984). Linear discriminant
analysis with misallocation in training samples. J. Amer.
Statist. Assoc. 79899–906.
CLARK ,P .a n dN IBLETT , T. (1989). The CN2 induction algorithm.
Machine Learning 3261–285.
COHEN , W. (1995). Fast effective rule induction. In Proceedings of
the 12th International Conference on Machine Learning 115–
123. Morgan Kaufmann, Palo Alto, CA.
CORTES ,C . ,F ISHER ,K . ,P REGIBON ,D .a n dR OGERS ,A .
(2000). Hancock: A language for extracting signatures from
data streams. In Proceedings of the Sixth ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and DataMining 9–17. ACM Press, New York.

STATISTICAL FRAUD DETECTION 247
CORTES ,C .a n dP REGIBON , D. (1998). Giga-mining. In Proceed-
ings of the Fourth International Conference on KnowledgeDiscovery and Data Mining 174–178. AAAI Press, Menlo
Park, CA.
C
ORTES ,C ,P REGIBON ,D .a n dV OLINSKY , C. (2001). Commu-
nities of interest. Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci. 2189 105–114.
COX,K .C . ,E ICK,S .G .a n dW ILLS , G. J. (1997). Visual data
mining: Recognizing telephone calling fraud. Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery 1225–231.
CSIDS (1999). Cisco secure intrusion detection system tech-
nical overview. Available at http://www.wheelgroup.com/
warp/public/cc/cisco/mkt/security/nranger/tech/ntran_tc.htm.
DENNING , D. E. (1997). Cyberspace attacks and countermeasures.
InInternet Besieged (D. E. Denning and P. J. Denning, eds.)
29–55. ACM Press, New York.
DORRONSORO ,J .R . ,G INEL ,F . ,S ANCHEZ ,C .a n dC RUZ,C .S .
(1997). Neural fraud detection in credit card operations. IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks 8827–834.
FANNING ,K . ,C OGGER ,K .O .a n dS R I VA S TAVA , R. (1995).
Detection of management fraud: A neural network approach.
International Journal of Intelligent Systems in Accounting,
Finance and Management 4113–126.
FAWCETT ,T .a n dP ROVOST , F. (1997a). Adaptive fraud detection.
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 1291–316.
FAWCETT ,T .a n dP ROVOST , F. (1997b). Combining data mining
and machine learning for effective fraud detection. In AAAI
Workshop on AI Approaches to Fraud Detection and Risk
Management 14–19. AAAI Press, Menlo Park, CA.
FAWCETT ,T .a n dP ROVOST , F. (1999). Activity monitoring:
Noticing interesting changes in behavior. In Proceedings of the
Fifth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining 53–62. ACM Press, New York.
FORREST ,S . ,H OFMEYR ,S . ,S OMAYAJI ,A .a n dL ONGSTAFF ,T .
(1996). A sense of self for UNIX processes. In Proceedings of
the 1996 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy 120–128.
IEEE Computer Society Press, Silver Spring, MD.
GHOSH ,S .a n dR EILLY , D. L. (1994). Credit card fraud detection
with a neural network. In Proceedings of the 27th Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences ( J .F .N u n a m a k e r
and R. H. Sprague, eds.) 3621–630. IEEE Computer Society
Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
GLASGOW , B. (1997). Risk and fraud in the insurance industry.
InAAAI Workshop on AI Approaches to Fraud Detection and
Risk Management 20–21. AAAI Press, Menlo Park, CA.
GOLDBERG ,H .a n dS ENA TOR , T. E. (1995). Restructuring data-
bases for knowledge discovery by consolidation and link for-mation. In Proceedings of the First International Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining 136–141. AAAI
Press, Menlo Park, CA.
G
OLDBERG ,H .a n dS ENA TOR , T. E. (1997). Break detection
systems. In AAAI Workshop on AI Approaches to Fraud
Detection and Risk Management 22–28. AAAI Press, Menlo
Park, CA.GOLDBERG ,H .a n dS ENA TOR , T. E. (1998). The FinCEN AI
system: Finding ﬁnancial crimes in a large database of cash
transactions. In Agent Technology :Foundations, Applications,
and Markets (N. Jennings and M. Wooldridge, eds.) 283–302.
Springer, Berlin.
GREEN ,B .P .a n dC HOI, J. H. (1997). Assessing the risk
of management fraud through neural network technology.
Auditing 1614–28.
HAND , D. J. (1981). Discrimination and Classiﬁcation .W i l e y ,
Chichester.
HAND , D. J. (1997). Construction and Assessment of Classiﬁca-
tion Rules . Wiley, Chichester.
HAND ,D .J .a n dB LUNT , G. (2001). Prospecting for gems in credit
card data. IMA Journal of Management Mathematics 12173–
200.
HAND ,D .J . ,B LUNT ,G . ,K ELLY ,M .G .a n dA DAMS ,N .M .
(2000). Data mining for fun and proﬁt (with discussion).Statist. Sci. 15111–131.
H
AND ,D .J .a n dH ENLEY , W. E. (1997). Statistical classiﬁcation
methods in consumer credit scoring: A review. J. Roy. Statist.
S o c .S e r .A 160523–541.
HASSIBI , K. (2000). Detecting payment card fraud with neural
networks. In Business Applications of Neural Networks
(P. J. G. Lisboa, A. Vellido and B. Edisbury, eds.). World Sci-
entiﬁc, Singapore.
HE,H . ,G RACO ,W .a n dY AO, X. (1999). Application of genetic
algorithm and k-nearest neighbour method in medical fraud
detection. Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci. 1585 74–81. Springer,
Berlin.
HE,H .X . ,W ANG ,J .C . ,G RACO ,W .a n dH AWKINS , S. (1997).
Application of neural networks to detection of medical fraud.Expert Systems with Applications 13329–336.
H
ILL, T. P. (1995). A statistical derivation of the signiﬁcant-digit
law.Statist. Sci. 10354–363.
HYNNINEN , J. (2000). Experiences in mobile phone fraud. Semi-
nar on Network Security. Report Tik-110.501, Helsinki Univ.Technology.
J
ENKINS , P. (2000). Getting smart with fraudsters. Financial
Times , September 23.
JENSEN , D. (1997). Prospective assessment of AI technologies
for fraud detection: a case study. In AAAI Workshop on AI
Approaches to Fraud Detection and Risk Management 34–38.
AAAI Press, Menlo Park, CA.
JU,W . - H .a n dV ARDI , Y. (2001). A hybrid high-order Markov
chain model for computer intrusion detection. J. Comput.
Graph. Statist. 10277–295.
KIRKLAND ,J .D . ,S ENA TOR ,T .E . ,H AYDEN ,J .J . ,D YBALA ,T . ,
GOLDBERG ,H .G .a n dS HYR, P. (1998). The NASD regula-
tion advanced detection system (ADS). In Proceedings of the
15th National Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI-98)
and of the 10th Conference on Innovative Applications of Ar-
tiﬁcial Intelligence (IAAI-98) 1055–1062. AAAI Press, Menlo
Park, CA.
KOSORESOW ,A .P .a n dH OFMEYR , S. A. (1997). Intrusion
detection via system call traces. IEEE Software 1435–42.
KUMAR ,S .a n dS PAFFORD , E. (1994). A pattern matching model
for misuse intrusion detection. In Proceedings of the 17th
National Computer Security Conference 11–21.
LACHENBRUCH , P. A. (1966). Discriminant analysis when the
initial samples are misclassiﬁed. Technometrics 8657–662.

248 R. J. BOLTON AND D. J. HAND
LACHENBRUCH , P. A. (1974). Discriminant analysis when the ini-
tial samples are misclassiﬁed. II: Non-random misclassiﬁca-tion models. Technometrics 16419–424.
L
ANE,T .a n dB RODLEY , C. E. (1998). Temporal sequence learn-
ing and data reduction for anomaly detection. In Proceedings
of the 5th ACM Conference on Computer and CommunicationsSecurity (CCS-98) 150–158. ACM Press, New York.
L
EE,W .a n dS TOLFO , S. (1998). Data mining approaches for
intrusion detection. In Proceedings of the 7th USENIX Security
Symposium , San Antonio, TX 79–93. USENIX Association,
Berkeley, CA.
LEONARD , K. J. (1993). Detecting credit card fraud using expert
systems. Computers and Industrial Engineering 25103–106.
LIPPMANN ,R . ,F RIED ,D . ,G RAF,I . ,H AINES ,J . ,
KENDALL ,K . ,M CCLUNG ,D . ,W EBER ,D . ,W EBSTER ,S . ,
WYSCHOGROD ,D . ,C UNNINGHAM ,R .a n dZ ISSMAN ,M .
(2000). Evaluating intrusion detection systems: The 1998DARPA off-line intrusion-detection evaluation. Unpublishedmanuscript, MIT Lincoln Laboratory.
M
AJOR ,J .A .a n dR IEDINGER , D. R. (1992). EFD: A hybrid
knowledge/statistical-based system for the detection of fraud.
International Journal of Intelligent Systems 7687–703.
MARCHETTE , D. J. (2001). Computer Intrusion Detection and
Network Monitoring :A Statistical Viewpoint . Springer, New
York.
MCCARTHY , J. (2000). Phenomenal data mining. Comm. ACM 43
75–79.
MCLACHLAN , G. J. (1992). Discriminant Analysis and Statistical
Pattern Recognition . Wiley, New York.
MOBILE EUROPE (2000). New IP world, new dangers. Mobile
Europe , March.
MOREAU ,Y . ,P RENEEL ,B . ,B URGE ,P . ,S HAWE -TAYLOR ,J . ,
STOERMANN ,C .a n dC OOKE , C. (1996). Novel techniques
for fraud detection in mobile communications. In ACTS Mobile
Summit, Grenada .
MOREAU ,Y . ,V ERRELST ,H .a n dV ANDEWALLE , J. (1997). De-
tection of mobile phone fraud using supervised neural net-works: A ﬁrst prototype. In Proceedings of 7th International
Conference on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ICANN’97) 1065–
1070. Springer, Berlin.
M
URAD ,U .a n dP INKAS , G. (1999). Unsupervised proﬁling for
identifying superimposed fraud. Principles of Data Mining
and Knowledge Discovery .Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence 1704 251–261. Springer, Berlin.
NEURAL TECHNOLOGIES (2000). Reducing telecoms fraud and
churn. Report, Neural Technologies, Ltd., Petersﬁeld, U.K.
NIGRINI , M. J. (1999). I’ve got your number. Journal of Accoun-
tancy May 79–83.
NIGRINI ,M .J .a n dM ITTERMAIER , L. J. (1997). The use of
Benford’s law as an aid in analytical procedures. Auditing :A
Journal of Practice and Theory 1652–67.
NORTEL (2000). Nortel networks fraud solutions. Fraud Primer,
Issue 2.0. Nortel Networks Corporation.
PAK,S .J .a n dZ DANOWICZ , J. S. (1994). A statistical analysis of
the U.S. Merchandise Trade Database and its uses in trans-fer pricing compliance and enforcement. Tax Management ,
May 11.P
AT IE NT , S. (2000). Reducing online credit card fraud.
Web Developer’s Journal . Available at http://www.
webdevelopersjournal.com/articles/card_fraud.html
PRESS ,S .J .a n dT ANUR , J. M. (2001). The Subjectivity of
Scientists and the Bayesian Approach . Wiley, New York.
PROVOST ,F .a n dF AWCETT , T. (2001). Robust classiﬁcation for
imprecise environments. Machine Learning 42203–210.
QU,D . ,V ETTER ,B .M . ,W ANG ,F . ,N ARAYAN ,R . ,W U,S .F . ,
HOU,Y .F . ,G ONG ,F .a n dS ARGOR , C. (1998). Statistical
anomaly detection for link-state routing protocols. In Proceed-
ings of the Sixth International Conference on Network Proto-cols62–70. IEEE Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA.
Q
UINLAN , J. R. (1990). Learning logical deﬁnitions from rela-
tions. Machine Learning 5239–266.
QUINLAN , J. R. (1993). C4.5 :Programs for Machine Learning .
Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA.
RIPLEY , B. D. (1996). Pattern Recognition and Neural Networks .
Cambridge Univ. Press.
ROBINSON ,M .E .a n dT AWN , J. A. (1995). Statistics for excep-
tional athletics records. Appl. Statist. 44499–511.
ROSSET ,S . ,M URAD ,U . ,N EUMANN ,E . ,I DAN,Y .a n d
PINKAS , G. (1999). Discovery of fraud rules for
telecommunications—challenges and solutions. In Pro-
ceedings of the Fifth ACM SIGKDD International Conferenceon Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining 409–413. ACM
Press, New York.
R
YAN,J . ,L IN,M .a n dM IIKKULAINEN , R. (1997). Intrusion
detection with neural networks. In AAAI Workshop on AI
Approaches to Fraud Detection and Risk Management 72–79.
AAAI Press, Menlo Park, CA.
SCHONLAU ,M . ,D UMOUCHEL ,W . ,J U,W . - H . ,K ARR,A .F . ,
THEUS ,M .a n dV ARDI , Y. (2001). Computer intrusion:
Detecting masquerades. Statist. Sci. 1658–74.
SENA TOR , T. E. (2000). Ongoing management and application
of discovered knowledge in a large regulatory organization:A case study of the use and impact of NASD regulation’sadvanced detection system (ADS). In Proceedings of the
Sixth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining 44–53. ACM Press, New York.
S
ENA TOR ,T .E . ,G OLDBERG ,H .G . ,W OOTON ,J . ,C OT-
TINI,M .A . ,U MAR KHAN ,A .F . ,K LINGER ,C .D . ,L LA-
MAS ,W .M . ,M ARRONE ,M .P .a n dW ONG , R. W. H. (1995).
The ﬁnancial crimes enforcement network AI system (FAIS)—
Identifying potential money laundering from reports of largecash transactions. AI Magazine 1621–39.
S
HAWE -TAYLOR ,J . ,H OWKER ,K . ,G OSSET ,P . ,H YLAND ,
M., V ERRELST ,H . ,M OREAU ,Y . ,S TOERMANN ,C .a n d
BURGE , P. (2000). Novel techniques for proﬁling and fraud
detection in mobile telecommunications. In Business Appli-
cations of Neural Networks (P. J. G. Lisboa, A. Vellido and
B.Edisbury, eds.) 113–139. World Scientiﬁc, Singapore.
SHIEH ,S . - P .W .a n dG LIGOR , V. D. (1991). A pattern-oriented
intrusion-detection model and its applications. In Proceedings
of the 1991 IEEE Computer Society Symposium on Research inSecurity and Privacy 327–342. IEEE Computer Society Press,
Silver Spring, MD.
S
HIEH ,S . - P .W .a n dG LIGOR , V. D. (1997). On a pattern-
oriented model for intrusion detection. IEEE Transactions on
Knowledge and Data Engineering 9661–667.

STATISTICAL FRAUD DETECTION 249
SMITH , R. L. (1997). Comment on “Statistics for exceptional
athletics records,” by M. E. Robinson and J. A. Tawn. Appl.
Statist. 46123–128.
STOLFO ,S .J . ,F AN,D .W . ,L EE,W . ,P RODROMIDIS ,A .L .a n d
CHAN , P. K. (1997a). Credit card fraud detection using meta-
learning: Issues and initial results. In AAAI Workshop on AI
Approaches to Fraud Detection and Risk Management 83–90.
AAAI Press, Menlo Park, CA.
STOLFO ,S . ,F AN,W . ,L EE,W . ,P RODROMIDIS ,A .L .a n d
CHAN , P. (1999). Cost-based modeling for fraud and intrusion
detection: Results from the JAM Project. In Proceedings of the
DARPA Information Survivability Conference and Exposition2130–144. IEEE Computer Press, New York.
S
TOLFO ,S .J . ,P RODROMIDIS ,A .L . ,T SELEPIS ,S . ,L EE,W . ,
FAN,D .W .a n dC HAN , P. K. (1997b). JAM: Java agents for
meta-learning over distributed databases. In AAAI Workshop
on AI Approaches to Fraud Detection and Risk Management91–98. AAAI Press, Menlo Park, CA.T
ANIGUCHI ,M . ,H AFT,M . ,H OLLMÉN ,J .a n dT RESP ,V .
(1998). Fraud detection in communication networks using
neural and probabilistic methods. In Proceedings of the 1998
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing (ICASSP’98) 21241–1244. IEEE Computer
Society Press, Silver Spring, MD.
U.S. C ONGRESS (1995). Information technologies for the control
of money laundering. Ofﬁce of Technology Assessment, Re-
port OTA-ITC-630, U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce, Wash-ington, DC.
W
ASSERMAN ,S .a n dF AUST , K. (1994). Social Network Analysis :
Methods and Applications . Cambridge Univ. Press.
WEBB, A. R. (1999). Statistical Pattern Recognition . Arnold,
London.
WHEELER ,R .a n dA ITKEN , S. (2000). Multiple algorithms
for fraud detection. Knowledge-Based Systems 13(2/3)
93–99.
Comment
Foster Provost
The state of research on fraud detection recalls John
Godfrey Saxe’s 19th-century poem “The Blind Menand the Elephant” (Felleman, 1936, page 521). Based
on a Hindu fable, each blind man experiences only a
part of the elephant, which shapes his opinion of thenature of the elephant: the leg makes it seem like atree, the tail a rope, the trunk a snake and so on. In fact,“ ...t hough each was partly in the right ...a l l w e r e i n
the wrong.” Saxe’s poem was a criticism of theological
debates, and I do not intend such a harsh criticismof research on fraud detection. However, because theproblem is so complex, each research project takesa particular angle of attack, which often obscures
the view of other parts of the problem. So, some
researchers see the problem as one of classiﬁcation,others of temporal pattern discovery; to some it isa problem perfect for a hidden Markov model andso on.
So why is fraud detection not simply classiﬁcation
or a member of some other already well-understoodproblem class? Bolton and Hand outline several char-acteristics of fraud detection problems that differenti-
ate them [as did Tom Fawcett and I in our review of
the problems and techniques of fraud detection (Faw-
Foster Provost is Associate Professor, Leonard N. Stern
School of Business, New York University, New York,New York 10012 (e-mail: provost@acm.org).cett and Provost, 2002)]. Consider fraud detection as a
classiﬁcation problem. Fraud detection certainly mustbe “cost-sensitive”—rather than minimizing error rate,some other loss function must be minimized. In addi-tion, usually the marginal class distribution is skewedstrongly toward one class (legitimate behavior). There-fore, modeling for fraud detection at least is a difﬁ-cult problem of estimating class membership probabil-ity, rather than simple classiﬁcation. However, this still
is an unsatisfying attempt to transform the true prob-
lem into one for which we have existing tools (prac-tical and conceptual). The objective function for frauddetection systems actually is much more complicated.For example, the value of detection is a function oftime. Immediate detection is much more valuable thandelayed detection. Unfortunately, evidence builds upover time, so detection is easier the longer it is de-layed. In cases of self-revealing fraud, eventually, de-tection is trivial (e.g., a defrauded customer calls tocomplain about fraudulent transactions on his or herbill).
In most research on modeling for fraud detection,
a subproblem is extracted (e.g., classifying transac-
tions or accounts as being fraudulent) and techniques
are compared for solving this subproblem—withoutmoving on to compare the techniques for the greaterproblem of detecting fraud. Each particular subprob-lem naturally will abstract away those parts that are

250 R. J. BOLTON AND D. J. HAND
problematic for the technique at hand (e.g., temporal
aspects are ignored for research on applying standardclassiﬁcation approaches). However, fraud detectioncan beneﬁt from classiﬁcation, regression, time-seriesanalysis, temporal pattern discovery, techniques for
combining evidence and others. For example, tempo-
ral sequences of particular actions can provide strongclues to the existence of fraud. A common exampleof such a temporal sequence is a triggering event fol-
lowed in a day or two by an acceleration of usage.
In credit card fraud, bandits purchase small amountsof gasoline (at a safe, automatic pump) to verify thata card is active before selling it. In wireless tele-phone fraud, bandits call a movie theater informa-
tion number for veriﬁcation. In a standard classiﬁca-
tion framework, temporal patterns must be engineeredcarefully into the representation. On the other hand,in a framework designed to focus on the discovery oftemporal sequences, many facets of advanced classi-
ﬁcation may be ignored; for example, classiﬁer learn-
ers can take advantage (automatically) of mixed-typevariables, including numeric, categorical, set-valuedand text, and hierarchical background knowledge (Aro-nis and Provost, 1997) such as geographic hierar-
chies.
This is just one example of a pair of different
views of the problem, each with its advantages anddisadvantages. Another is, as Bolton and Hand pointout, the supervised/unsupervised duality to modeling
for fraud detection: some fraudulent activity can be
detected by applying knowledge generalized from past,labeled cases; other activity is better detected bynoticing behavior that differs signiﬁcantly from thenorm.
Fraud detection and intervention can have two
modes: automatic and mixed initiative (human/compu-ter). Automatic intervention only occurs when thereis very strong evidence that fraud exists; otherwise,
false alarms would be disastrous. Remember that fraud
detection systems consider millions (sometimes tensor hundreds of millions) of accounts. On a customerbase of only 1 million accounts, a daily false-alarmrate of even 1% would yield 10,000 false alarms
a day; the cost of dealing with these (e.g., if ac-
counts were incorrectly shut down) could be enor-mous.
Mixed-initiative detection and intervention deals
with cases that do not have enough evidence for au-
tomatic intervention (or with applications for which
automatic intervention does not make sense). Frauddetection systems create “cases” comprising the ev-
idence collected so far that indicates fraud. Fraudanalysts process these cases, often going to auxil-iary sources of data to augment their analyses. Atany time, a case list can be sorted by some score:
a probability of fraud, computed from all the evi-
dence collected so far, an expected loss or simply anad hoc score. The unit of analysis for the produc-tion of the score is complicated: it is composed of
a series of transactions, which comprises the poten-
tially fraudulent activity and possibly legitimate ac-tivity as well. The unit of analysis also could includeother information, such as that taken from accountapplications, background databases, behavior proﬁles
(which may have been compiled from previous trans-
action activity) and possibly account annotations madeby prior analysts (e.g., “this customer often triggersrule X”).
A part of the fraud detection elephant that has not
received much attention is the peculiar nonstationary
nature of the problem. Not only does the phenom-enon being modeled change over time—sometimesdramatically—it changes in direct response to the mod-eling of it. As soon as a model is put into place, it
begins to lose effectiveness. For example, after real-
izing that the appearance of a large volume of trans-actions on a brand new account is used as an indi-cator of application/subscription fraud, criminals be-gin to lie low and even pay initial bills before ramp-
ing up spending. After realizing that “calling dens” in
certain locations had led to models that detect wire-less fraud based on those locations, criminals con-structed roving calling dens (where fraudulent wire-less service was provided in the back of a van that
drove around the city). This adaptation is problematic
for the typical information systems development lifecycle (analysis →design→programming →deploy-
ment→maintenance). At the very least it is necessary
for models to be able to be changed quickly and fre-
quently. A more satisfying (but perhaps not yet prac-ticable) solution would be to have a learning system,which can modify its own models in the ongoing armsrace.
A practical view of the fraud detection elephant
shows other issues that make fraud detection problemsdifﬁcult. They must be kept in mind if one intendsresults actually to apply to real fraud detection. Sys-tems for fraud detection, in many applications, face
tremendous computational demands. Transactions ar-
rive in real time; often only milliseconds (or less) can

STATISTICAL FRAUD DETECTION 251
be allocated to process each. In this short time, the sys-
tem must record the transaction in its database, accessrelevant account-speciﬁc data, process the transaction
and historical data through the fraud detection model
and create a case, update a case or issue an alarm if
warranted (and if not, possibly update a customer’s
proﬁle). Fraud models must be very efﬁcient to apply.Furthermore, the models must be very space efﬁcient.
Storing a neural network or a decision tree for each
customer is not feasible for millions of customers; it
may be possible only to store for each customer a few
parameters to a general model. Thus, both time andspace constraints argue for simple fraud detection mod-
els.
A user perspective of fraud detection (as a mixed-
initiative process) argues for the use of models that
are comprehensible to the analysts. For example, formany analysts, rule-based models are easier to inter-
pret than are neural network models. The set of rules
that apply to a particular case may guide the subse-
quent (human) investigation. On the other hand, the
most commercially successful vendor of fraud detec-
tion systems (to my knowledge) uses neural networks
extensively for detecting fraud. Of course, commercialsuccess is a dubious measure of technical quality; how-
ever, one can get an interesting view into real world
fraud detection systems by studying HNC Software’s
patent (Gopinathan et al., 1998). (As of this writing, a
patent search on keywords “fraud detection” yields 80patents.) In particular, their extensive list of variables,
created to summarize past activity so that a neural net-
work can be applied, illustrates the problem engineer-
ing necessary to transform the fraud detection problem
into one that is amenable to standard modeling tech-niques.
It would be useful to have a precise deﬁnition of a
class (or of several classes) of fraud detection prob-
lems, which takes into account the variety of charac-
teristics that make statistical fraud detection difﬁcult.If such a characterization exists already in statistics,
the machine learning and data mining communities
would beneﬁt from its introduction. Not knowing of
one, Tom Fawcett and I attempted to deﬁne one class
of “activity monitoring” problems and illustrate sev-eral instances (Fawcett and Provost, 1999). Earlier we
deﬁned “superimposition fraud” (Fawcett and Provost,
1997a) to try to unify similar forms of wireless tele-
phone fraud, calling card fraud, credit card fraud, cer-
tain computer intrusions and so on, where fraudulentusage is superimposed upon legitimate usage and for
which similar solution methods may apply. However,neither of these captures all of the important character-
istics.
The characterization of such a class of problems
is important for several reasons. First of all, different
fraud detection problems are considerably similar—itis important to understand how well success of dif-
ferent techniques generalizes. Is the similarity super-
ﬁcial? Are there deeper characteristics of the prob-lem or data that must be considered? [This seems to
be the case, e.g., with classiﬁcation problems (Perlich,
Provost and Simonoff, 2001).] Also, to succeed at de-
tecting fraud, different sorts of modeling techniques
must be composed, for example, temporal patterns maybecome features for a system for estimating class mem-
bership probabilities, and estimators of class member-
ship probability could be used in temporal evidencegathering. Furthermore, systems using different solu-
tion methods should be on equal footing for compari-
son. Seeming success on any subproblem does not nec-
essarily imply success on the greater problem. Finally,
it would be beneﬁcial to focus researchers from manydisciplines, with many complementary techniques, on
a common, very important set of problems. The juxta-
position of knowledge and ideas from multiple disci-plines will beneﬁt them all and will be facilitated by
the precise formulation of a problem of common inter-
est.
Of course I am not arguing that research must ad-
dress all of these criteria simultaneously (immedi-ately), and I am not being strongly critical of prior work
on fraud detection: we all must abstract away parts of
such a complicated problem to make progress on oth-
ers. Nevertheless, it is important that researchers take
as an ultimate goal the solution to the full problem.We all should consider carefully whether partial solu-
tions will or will not be extensible. Fraud detection is
a real, important problem with many real, interestingsubproblems. Bolton and Hand’s review of the state
of the art shows that there is a lot of room for use-
ful research. However, the research community should
make sure that work is progressing toward the solu-
tion to the larger problem, whether by the developmentof techniques that solve larger portions or by facilitat-
ing the composition of techniques in a principled man-
ner.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Tom Fawcett and I worked very closely on prob-
lems of fraud detection, and my views have been in-
ﬂuenced considerably by our discussions and collabo-
rative work.

252 R. J. BOLTON AND D. J. HAND
Comment
Leo Breiman
This is an enjoyable and illuminating article. It deals
with an area that few statisticians are aware of, butthat is of critical importance economically and in termsof security. I am appreciative to the authors for theeducation in fraud detection this article gave me andtoStatistical Science for publishing it. There are some
interesting aspects that make this class of problemsunique and that I comment on, running the risk ofrepeating points made in the article.
The analysis has to deal with a large number of prob-
lems simultaneously. For instance, in credit card fraud,the records of millions of customers have to be ana-lyzed one by one to set up individual alarm settings. Itis not a single unsupervised or supervised problem—a multitude of such problems have to be simultane-ously addressed and “solved” for diverse data records.
Yet the algorithm selected, modulo a few tunable pa-
rameters, has to be “one size ﬁts all.” Otherwise theon-line computations are not feasible. The alarm bellsettings have to be constantly updated. For instance, ascustomers age and change their economic level and lifestyles, usage characteristics change. There are also se-rious database issues—how to structure the large data-bases so that the incoming streams of data are acces-sible for the kind of analysis necessary. Collaborationwith database experts is essential.
Most of all, these problems require an uninhibited
sense of exploration and can be enjoyable adventuresin living with data. The goal is predictive accuracyand the tools are algorithmic models (see Breiman,2001). The class of problems is novel, even in machinelearning. No one tool (neural nets, etc.) is instantlyapplicable to all of these problems. The algorithms
have to be designed to ﬁt the data. This means
that an essential part of the venture is immersionin and exploration of the data. My experience isthat good predictive algorithms do not appear by aselection, unguided by the data, from what algorithmsare available. Furthermore, the process is one ofsuccessive informed revision. If an algorithm, forinstance, has too high a false alarm rate, then one has to
Leo Breiman is Professor, Department of Statistics,
University of California, Berkeley, California 94720-3860 (e-mail: leo@stat.berkeley.edu)go back to the data and try to understand why the false
alarm rate is high. Understanding will help to lower thefalse alarm rate.
The process is an alternation between algorithm and
data. Personally, if a user reports that an algorithmI have devised gives anomalous results on his dataset, the ﬁrst thing I do is to request that he ship methe data. By running the data myself and trying tounderstand what it is about the data that causes the poor
performance, I can learn a lot about the deﬁciencies of
the algorithm and, possibly, improve it. Granted thatwith a changing database running to gigabytes andterrabytes, it may be difﬁcult to look at and understandthe data. However, this should not deter analysts—infact, looking for good ways to display and understandthe data is an essential foundation for the constructionof good algorithms.
There are other difﬁcult boundary conditions in the
instances of fraud detection I have looked at. If onetries to design algorithms that use multidimensionalinformation, the problem is that the algorithm maybecome too wrapped in the individual data and thefalse alarm rate rises. However, simple and robust
algorithms may not utilize enough information to give
a satisfactory detection rate.
The choice between supervised and unsupervised
learning may be difﬁcult and interesting. Assume thatin the database, examples are available of veriﬁed fraudand uncontaminated data. As the authors mention, thecases of veriﬁed fraud in the data are a tiny fraction ofall of the data.
In detecting credit card fraud, for instance, there
are two ways to go. The ﬁrst is to consider one user(G.B.S.) and let his weekly purchases be instances ofclass 1. Take all records of a week of fraudulent useand assign them to class 2. Then run a classiﬁcationalgorithm on the two class data constructing a method
that discriminates between the two classes. Weight the
probabilities of class 1 and class 2 assignment so as tokeep the false alarm rate down to a preassigned level.Then run the discrimination method on all future weeksof G.B.S.’s purchases.
This, in machine learning, is called supervised learn-
ing. It relies on having two labeled classes of instancesto discriminate between. Unsupervised learning occurswhere there are no class labels or responses attached

STATISTICAL FRAUD DETECTION 253
to the data vectors. Applied to fraud detection, it takes
all weekly purchases by G.B.S. in the recent past andsummarizes them in a few descriptive statistics. For in-
stance, one could be total average weekly purchases
and their standard deviation. If, in the current week,
the total purchases exceed the average by many stan-
dard deviations, then an alarm bell goes off—that is,a high suspicion score is recorded.
My impression is that, where applicable, supervised
learning will give lower false alarm rates. Think of the
uncontaminated weekly data for G.B.S. as forming a
fuzzy ball in high dimensions. Unsupervised learningputs a boundary around this ball and assigns a high
suspicion score to anything outside of the boundary.
Supervised learning creates a second fuzzy ball con-
sisting of fraudulent weekly data and assigns a high
suspicion score only if the probability of being inclass 2 (fraud) is sufﬁciently higher than being in
class 1. Data that are outside of the unsupervised
boundary may not be in the direction of class 2. How-
ever, the supervised approach makes the assumption
that future fraudulent data will have the same char-
acteristics as past fraudulent data and further assumes
that fraudulent use of the G.B.S. account will result incharacteristics similar to those in the fraudulent use of
other accounts.
Fraud detection has some echoes in other areas. For
instance, in the 1970s, Los Angeles had metal detectors
buried every
1
4mile in every lane in a 17 mile triangular
section of heavily traveled freeways. Each detector
produced a signal as a car passed over it, resulting in
estimates of trafﬁc density and average speed. One goal
was to use the data from these detectors, channeled
into a central computer, to give early warning ofaccidents that were blocking the trafﬁc ﬂow. However,
at the most critical times, when these freeways were
operating at near capacity trafﬁc, stoppages in trafﬁc
ﬂow could develop spontaneously. Some sections of
freeway were more likely to develop stoppages, forexample, a slight upgrade or a curve. A false alarm
could generate a dispatch of a tow truck, patrol car or
helicopter. My mission, as a consultant, was to develop
an algorithm, speciﬁc to each section of freeway, to
detect accident blockages with high accuracy and lowfalse alarm rate.
In astronomy, an important problem is to develop
algorithms that can be applied to the ﬁnely detailed
pictures of millions of stellar objects and locate those
that “are unlike anything we’re familiar with to date.”Here “unlike” does not mean bigger or smaller, but
having different physical characteristics than anythingseen to date. I have thought about this problem from
time to time, but see no satisfactory solution.
In a number of ﬁelds a common problem, in both
supervised and unsupervised learning, is that the num-
ber of data vectors is large, but the number of class 2
cases (i.e., fraudulent data vectors) is an extremely
small fraction of the total. Using human judgment togo over a large database and recognize all class 2 data
is not feasible. For example, in astronomy, an interest-
ing class of objects are butterﬂy stars—stars that havea visual picture that resembles a butterﬂy. A project at
the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory hoped to
identify all butterﬂy stars in a gigabyte database re-
sulting from a sky survey. Working on a small frac-
tion of the data, a team of astronomers identiﬁed about300 butterﬂy stars.
The goal of the machine learning group working on
this project was to identify almost all of the butterﬂy
stars in the survey while requiring minimal further
identiﬁcation work by the astronomers. This requiredthe construction of an optimal incremental strategy.
Use the ﬁrst 300 identiﬁcations to ﬁnd further objects
with high probability of being butterﬂies, ask theastronomers to say “yes” or “no” on these and then
repeat using the larger sample.
The challenges in fraud detection are both formi-
dable and intriguing. Many of the problems are
nowhere near solution in terms of satisfactory falsealarm and detection rates. It is an open ﬁeld for the ex-
ercise of ingenuity, algorithm creation and data snoop-
ing. It is also a ﬁeld worth billions.
The authors titled their paper “Statistical Fraud
Detection,” implying that this area is within the realmof statistics—would that it were—but the number of
statisticians involved is small. The authors write that
they are covering a few areas “in which statisticalmethods can be applied.” The list of statistical methods
that I extracted from the article are
Neural nets
Rule-based methods
Tree-based algorithms
Genetic algorithmsFuzzy logic
Mixture models
Bayesian networks
Meta-learning
These were developed in machine learning, not
statistics (with the exception of mixture models), andlead to algorithmic modeling. Because of the emphasis
on stochastic data modeling in statistics, very few

254 R. J. BOLTON AND D. J. HAND
statisticians are familiar with algorithm modeling,
which is sometimes referred to (with a touch ofprudishness) as “ad hoc.”
We are ceding some of the most interesting of cur-
rent statistical problems to computer scientists and en-gineers allied to the machine learning area. Detectionof fraud is an example. Young statisticians need tolearn about algorithmic modeling and how it applies
to a large variety of statistical problems. The Berke-ley Statistics Department made a move in this direc-tion a few years ago by making a joint appointmentwith the Computer Science Department of an excellentscientist in the machine learning area. We will be doingmore.
Rejoinder
Richard J. Bolton and David J. Hand
We would like to thank the discussants for their
valuable contributions. They have reinforced some ofour points and also drawn attention to points whichwe glossed over or failed to make. Their contributions
have signiﬁcantly enhanced the value of the paper.
We emphasized that many and varied tools would
be required to attack the fraud detection problem andthis has been echoed by the discussants, who make the
additional important point that, whatever subproblems
are identiﬁed, the tools that are adapted or developedto attack them should do so in combination and to thebeneﬁt of the fraud detection process as a whole. The
message is that fraud detection is greater than the sum
of its parts and that it can be easy to lose sight of thiswhen dissecting the problem. In a similar vein, Provostalso rightly draws attention to the fact that there are
additional subtleties in applying even standard tools to
fraud detection that may not at ﬁrst be apparent. Forexample, his observation that the value of detectionis greater the sooner it is made, but that detection
becomes easier the more time that has passed. In fact,
Hand (1996, 1997) suggested that many, if not most,classiﬁcation problems have such concealed subtleties,and that researchers in statistics and machine learning
have typically extracted only the basic form of the
problem. So, as tools for classiﬁcation bump againstthe ceiling of the greatest classiﬁcation accuracy thatcan be achieved in practice, so it becomes more and
more important to take note of these other aspects of
the problems.
Both discussants comment on the importance of the
temporal aspect of fraud. We agree that the incorpora-
tion of temporal information into the (commonly) sta-
tic classiﬁcation structure is essential in most cases offraud detection and that further research on tools fortackling this would be of great beneﬁt. Populations
evolve as people enter and exit them, but the behav-ior of individuals who remain in a population can also
change. Breiman describes some interesting examplesfrom outside the fraud detection domain which illus-trate that there are other applications where statisti-
cal research may offer solutions similar to those re-
quired for fraud detection. One such domain, whichis affected by changing populations, is credit scoring(Kelly, Hand and Adams, 1999). Still on a temporal
theme, the adaptability of fraud detection tools to the
changing behavior of fraudsters must be addressed soas to ensure the continued effectiveness of a fraud de-tection system: as new detection strategies are intro-
duced, so fraudsters will change their behavior accord-
ingly. Models of behavior can help with this, althoughthe indicators of fraud that are independent of a partic-ular account may require a different strategy.
We take Breiman’s point that many of the methods
we described were developed outside the narrow sta-tistical community. However, we had not intended theword “statistical” to refer merely to the stochastic data
model-based statistics of his recent article (Breiman,
2001). Rather, we had intended it in the sense of Cham-bers’ “greater statistics” (Chambers, 1993), “every-thing related to learning from data.” Of course, the
point that Breiman makes, that the tools we have de-
scribed have not been developed by conventional sta-tisticians, is something of an indictment of statisticians(Hand, 1998).
We endorse Provost’s conclusion about the impor-
tance of looking at the full problem. It is all too easyto abstract a component problem and then overreﬁnethe solution to this, way beyond a level which can be
useful or relevant in the context of the overall problem.
Conversely, it is all too easy to be misled to a focus on aperipheral or irrelevant aspect of the subproblem. Aca-demic researchers have often been criticized for this in
other contexts. Of course, the fact is that many of the

STATISTICAL FRAUD DETECTION 255
subproblems require specialist expertise and specialists
in a narrow area may ﬁnd it difﬁcult to see the broader
picture. Moreover, naturally, such specialists will wantto apply their specialist tool: to those who have a ham-mer, everything looks like a nail.
The discussion contributions have emphasized the
fact that fraud detection is an important and challeng-ing area for statisticians; indeed, for data analysts ingeneral. Challenging aspects include the large datasets, the fact that one class is typically very small,
that the data are dynamic and that speedy decisions
may be very important, that the nature of the fraudschanges over time, often in response to the very de-tection strategies that may be put in place, that there
may be no training instances and that detecting fraud
involves multiple interconnected approaches. All ofthese and other aspects mean that collaboration withdata experts, who can provide human insight into the
underlying processes, is essential.
ADDITIONAL REFERENCES
ARONIS ,J .a n dP ROVOST , F. (1997). Increasing the efﬁciency
of data mining algorithms with breadth-ﬁrst marker propaga-
tion. In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining 119–122. AAAI Press,
Menlo Park, CA.BREIMAN , L. (2001). Statistical modeling: The two cultures (with
discussion). Statist. Sci. 16199–231.
CHAMBERS , J. M. (1993). Greater or lesser statistics: A choice for
future research. Statist. Comput. 3182–184.
FAWCETT ,T .a n dP ROVOST , F. (2002). Fraud detection. In Hand-
book of Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (W. Kloesgen
and J. Zytkow, eds.). Oxford Univ. Press.
FELLEMAN , H., ed. (1936). The Best Loved Poems of the American
People . Doubleday, New York.
GOPINATHAN ,K .M . ,B IAFORE ,L .S . ,F ERGUSON ,W .M . ,
LAZARUS ,M .A . ,P AT HRIA ,A .K .a n dJ OST, A. (1998).
Fraud detection using predictive modeling. U.S. Patent5819226, October 6.
H
AND , D. J. (1996). Classiﬁcation and computers: Shifting the fo-
cus. In COMPSTAT-96 :Proceedings in Computational Statis-
tics(A. Prat, ed.) 77–88. Physica, Heidelberg.
HAND , D. J. (1998). Breaking misconceptions—statistics and its
relationship to mathematics (with discussion). The Statistician
47245–250, 284–286.
KELLY ,M .G . ,H AND ,D .J .a n dA DAMS , N. M. (1999). The
impact of changing populations on classiﬁer performance.InProceedings of the Fifth ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (S.
Chaudhuri and D. Madigan, eds.) 367–371. ACM Press, NewYork.
P
ERLICH ,C . ,P ROVOST ,F .a n dS IMONOFF , J. S. (2001). Tree
induction vs. logistic regression: A learning-curve analysis.
Journal of Machine Learning Research . To appear.

