Information  Sciences 482 (2019) 301–320  
Contents  lists available  at ScienceDirect  
Information  Sciences  
journal  homepage:  www.elsevier.com/locate/ins  
Linguistic  data  mining  with  complex  networks:  A 
stylometric-oriented  approach  
Tomasz  Stanisz  a , Jarosław  Kwapie  ´n a , Stanisław  Dro ˙zd ˙z a , b , ∗
a Complex Systems Theory Department,  Institute of Nuclear Physics, Polish Academy  of Sciences, ul. Radzikowskiego  152, Kraków 31-342, 
Poland 
b Faculty of Physics, Mathematics  and Computer  Science, Cracow University  of Technology,  ul. Warszawska  24, Kraków 31-155, Poland 
a r t i c l e i n f o 
Article history: 
Received  14 August 2018 
Revised 10 January 2019 
Accepted  11 January 2019 
Available  online 14 January 2019 
Keywords:  
Complex  networks  
Natural language  
Data mining 
Stylometry  
Authorship  attribution  a b s t r a c t 
By representing  a text by a set of words and their co-occurrences,  one obtains a word- 
adjacency  network  being a reduced  representation  of a given language  sample.  In this pa- 
per, the possibility  of using network  representation  to extract information  about individual  
language  styles of literary texts is studied.  By determining  selected  quantitative  charac- 
teristics  of the networks  and applying  machine  learning  algorithms,  it is possible  to dis- 
tinguish  between  texts of different  authors.  Within the studied set of texts, English and 
Polish, a properly  rescaled  weighted  clustering  coeﬃcients  and weighted  degrees  of only 
a few nodes in the word-adjacency  networks  are suﬃcient  to obtain the authorship  attri- 
bution accuracy  over 90%. A correspondence  between  the text authorship  and the word- 
adjacency  network  structure  can therefore  be found. The network  representation  allows 
to distinguish  individual  language  styles by comparing  the way the authors  use particular  
words and punctuation  marks. The presented  approach  can be viewed as a generalization  
of the authorship  attribution  methods  based on simple lexical features.  
Additionally,  other network  parameters  are studied,  both local and global ones, for both the 
unweighted  and weighted  networks.  Their potential  to capture the writing style diversity  
is discussed;  some differences  between  languages  are observed.  
©2 0 1 9 Elsevier  Inc. All rights reserved.  
1. Introduction  
Many systems  studied  in contemporary  science,  from the standpoint  of their structure,  can be viewed  as the ensembles  
of large number  of elements  interacting  with each other. Such systems  can often be conveniently  represented  by networks,  
consisting  of nodes and links between  these nodes. As nodes and links are abstract  concepts,  they may refer to many 
different  objects  and types of interactions,  respectively.  Therefore,  a rapid development  of the so-called  network  science has 
found application  in studies  on a great variety  of systems,  like social networks,  biological  networks,  networks  representing  
ﬁnancial  dependencies,  the structure  of the Internet,  or the organization  of transportation  systems  [8,12,16,23,34,38,43]  . 
The mentioned  networks  are usually  referred  to as complex  networks;  they owe their name to a general  concept  of 
complexity  . The above-listed  systems  are often viewed  as examples  of complex  systems.  Although  complexity  does not have 
a precise  deﬁnition,  it can be stated that a complex  system  typically  consists  of a large number  of elements  nonlinearly  
∗Corresponding  author. 
E-mail address: stanislaw.drozdz@ifj.edu.pl  (S. Dro ˙zd ˙z). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2019.01.040  
0020-0255/© 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.  

302 T. Stanisz, J. Kwapie ´n and S. Dro ˙zd ˙z / Information  Sciences 482 (2019) 301–320 
interacting  with each other, is able to display  collective  behavior,  and, by exchanging  energy  or information  with surround-  
ings, can modify  its internal  structure  [23] . Many complex  systems  exhibit  emergent  properties,  which are characteristic  
for a system  as a whole, and cannot be simply derived  or predicted  solely from the properties  of the system’s  individual  
elements.  The existence  of the emergent  phenomena  is often summarized  with the phrases  such as “more is different” or  
“the whole is something  besides  the parts”. 
In this context,  natural  language  is clearly a vivid instance  of a complex  system.  Higher levels of its structure  usually  
cannot be simply reduced  to the sum of the elements  involved.  For example,  phonemes  or letters basically  do not have any 
meaning,  but the words consisting  of them are references  to speciﬁc  objects  and concepts.  Likewise,  knowing  the meaning  
of separate  words does not necessarily  provide  the understanding  of a sentence  composed  of them, as a sentence  can carry 
additional  information,  like an emotional  load or a metaphorical  message.  Other features  of natural  language  that are typical 
for complex  systems  have also been studied,  for example  long-range  correlations  [47] , fractal and multifractal  properties  
[5,10,13]  , self-organization  [9,40] or lack of characteristic  scale, which manifests  itself in power laws such as the well-known  
Zipf’s law or Heaps’ law (the latter also referred  to as the Herdan’s  law) [14,35,48]  . 
The network  formalism  has proven  to be useful in studying  and processing  natural  language.  It allows to represent  lan- 
guage on many levels of its structure  - the linguistic  networks  can be constructed  to reﬂect word co-occurrence,  semantic  
similarity,  grammatical  relationships  etc. It has a signiﬁcant  practical  importance  - the methods  of analysis  of graphs and 
networks  have been employed  in the natural  language  processing  tasks, like keyword  selection,  document  summarization,  
word-sense  disambiguation  or machine  translation  [2,3,32]  . Networks  also seem to be a promising  tool in research  on the 
language  itself; they have been applied  to study the language  complexity  [17,21,27]  , the structural  diversity  of different  
languages  [28] , or the role of punctuation  in written  language  [22] . Furthermore,  the network  formalism  appears  at the 
interface  between  linguistics  and other scientiﬁc  ﬁelds, for example  in sociolinguistics,  which, by studying  social networks,  
investigates  human  language  usage and evolution  [11,19] . 
In this paper the properties  of the word-adjacency  networks  constructed  from literary  texts are studied.  Such networks  
may be treated  as a representation  of a given text, taking into account  mutual  co-occurrences  of words. They can be char- 
acterized  by some parameters  that describe  their structure  quantitatively.  Determining  these parameters  results in obtaining  
a set of a few numbers  capturing  considered  features  of networks  and, consequently,  features  of the underlying  text sam- 
ple. In that sense the procedure  of constructing  a network  from a text and calculating  its characteristics  may be viewed  
as extracting  essential  traits of the language  sample  and putting  them into a compact  form. Subjecting  the obtained  data 
to data mining  algorithms  reveals  that the networks  representing  texts of different  authors  can be distinguished  one from 
another  by their parameters.  After appropriately  proposed  preparation  of the data, such procedure  of authorship  attribution,  
though  quite simple,  results in relatively  high accuracy.  It therefore  leads to a statement  that information  on individual  lan- 
guage style used in a given text can be drawn from the set of characteristics  describing  the corresponding  word-adjacency  
network.  This is comparable  with the known  results concerning  identiﬁcation  of individual  language  styles using the linguis-  
tic networks  [1,30] ; however,  the previous  research  has typically  focused  on the network  types and the network  structure  
aspects  other than considered  here. 
2. Data and methods  
2.1. Word-adjacency  networks  
The set of the studied  texts consists  of novels in English  and Polish. For each language,  there are 48 novels,  6 novels for 
each of 8 different  authors.  The full list of the books and authors  is presented  in Appendix.  The texts were downloaded  from 
the websites  of Project  Gutenberg  [36] , Wikisources  [45] , and Wolne Lektury  [46] . Both Polish and English-language  authors  
considered  in this paper are widely recognized  as notable  writers,  whose works had an impact  on the shaping  of culture;  
two of the Polish writers  - Henryk  Sienkiewicz  and Władysław  Reymont  - are laureates  of the Nobel Prize in Literature.  
Among  the selection  criteria  for the authors,  worth mentioning  are the number  of books (each studied  author has at least 
6 books, each of them with at least 25,0 0 0 words),  and their availability  (all the books are publicly  available).  
Each text studied  in this paper is transformed  into a word-adjacency  network,  and resulting  networks  are subjected  
to adequate  calculations  and analyses.  However,  before the construction  of the networks,  the texts are appropriately  pre- 
processed.  Preparation  includes:  removing  annotations  and redundant  whitespaces,  converting  all characters  to lowercase,  
and replacing  some types of punctuation  marks by special  symbols,  which are treated  as usual words in the subsequent  
steps of analysis.  This approach  is justiﬁed  by the observation  of the fact that in terms of some statistical  properties,  punc- 
tuation  follows  the same patterns  as words [22] and may be a valuable  carrier of information  on the language  sample.  The 
punctuation  taken into consideration  is: full stop, question  mark, exclamation  mark, ellipsis,  comma,  dash, colon, semicolon  
and brackets.  The remaining  punctuation  types (for example,  quotation  marks)  are removed  from text samples,  along with 
marks that do not indicate  the structure  of sentence  (examples  are: the full stops used after abbreviations,  or quotation  
dashes - i.e. the dashes placed at the beginning  of quotations  in some languages,  including  Polish).  
After pre-processing,  the texts are transformed  into the word-adjacency  networks.  In such networks  each vertex repre- 
sents one of the words appearing  in the underlying  text. The edges reﬂect the co-occurrence  of words. In an unweighted  
network,  an edge is present  between  two vertices,  if the words that correspond  to these vertices  appear  at least once next 
to each other in the text (see Fig. 3 ). In a weighted  network,  edges are assigned  weights  that represent  the exact number  

T. Stanisz, J. Kwapie ´n and S. Dro ˙zd ˙z / Information  Sciences 482 (2019) 301–320 303 
of the co-occurrences  of the respective  words. It is assumed  that the theoretically  possible  case of words occurring  next to 
themselves  is ignored  - i.e. there are no edges connecting  a vertex with itself in the resulting  network.  
An unweighted  network  may be treated  as a special  case of a weighted  network  (with all edge weights  equal to 
1). When determining  the characteristics  in a weighted  network,  one may either take weights  into account  or neglect  
them; the latter case is equivalent  to the calculation  of the parameters  of an unweighted  network.  Therefore,  all net- 
works studied  in this paper may be viewed  as weighted  ones. With such approach,  weighted  and unweighted  versions  of 
a given network  characteristic  can be treated  as two distinct  quantities  describing  a weighted  network,  with two different  
deﬁnitions.  
In the process  of network  construction,  words are not lemmatized,  which means that their inﬂected  forms are distin- 
guished.  Hence all such forms occurring  in a particular  text end up as separate  vertices  in the resulting  network.  All studied  
networks  are undirected  - which means that a pair of adjacent  words is counted  in the same way as a pair with reversed  
order. 
2.2. Network  characteristics  
Throughout  this paper, a few concepts  and quantities  known  from the ﬁeld of complex  network  analysis  are used. This 
section  presents  them brieﬂy.  
For each studied  network,  a number  of characteristics  are calculated.  Depending  on the context,  these characteristics  are 
either global (related  to the network  as a whole),  or local (related  to particular  vertices  in the network).  The quantities  
describing  the network’s  structure  can be unweighted  or weighted  - the latter take into account  the weights  assigned  to 
edges in the weighted  networks.  The characteristics  studied  in this paper are: vertex degree,  average  shortest  path length,  
clustering  coeﬃcient,  assortativity  coeﬃcient,  and modularity.  Although  these quantities  are widely applied  in the stud- 
ies on complex  networks  and are well described  in literature  [15,37]  , there are some ambiguities,  especially  pertaining  to 
generalizations  onto the weighted  networks.  For this reason,  the adequate  deﬁnitions  are given below. 
2.2.1. Vertex degree 
Degree  is a quantity  describing  individual  vertices.  In simple (i.e. unweighted)  networks,  the degree of a given ver- 
tex v is the number  of edges touching  v , and is denoted  by deg (v ) . In weighted  networks,  the degree can be general-  
ized to weighted  degree (also called strength  and therefore  denoted  by str( v )), which is the sum of weights  of the edges 
touching  v . 
In word-adjacency  networks,  the vertex degree is obviously  related  to the frequency  of the corresponding  word in the 
considered  text sample.  In its weighted  version,  it is equal to 2 f ( v ), where f ( v ) stands for the overall number  of occurrences  
of the word v (apart from the ﬁrst and the last word in a sample,  for which the weighted  degree is equal to 2 f(v ) −1 ). In 
unweighted  networks,  the degree of a vertex represents  the number  of words that appear  at least once next to the word 
assigned  to this vertex. 
2.2.2. Clustering  coeﬃcient  
In unweighted  networks,  the clustering  coeﬃcient  of a given vertex represents  the probability  that two randomly  chosen  
direct neighbours  of this vertex are also direct neighbours  of each other. By a direct neighbour  of a vertex v we understand  
a vertex connected  with v by an edge. Let m v stand for the number  of edges in the network  that link the direct neighbours  
of v with other direct neighbours  of v . Then the clustering  coeﬃcient  of v is given by: 
C u (v ) = 2 m v 
deg (v ) ·( deg (v ) −1) , (1) 
where the subscript  “u ” comes  from the word “unweighted”.  In a word-adjacency  network,  the clustering  coeﬃcient  of a 
given word v describes  the probability  that any two words that appear  next to v in the considered  text sample  also appear  
next to each other at least once. 
Generalization  of the clustering  coeﬃcient  onto the weighted  networks  can be done in multiple  ways. In this paper a 
deﬁnition  proposed  by Barrat et al. [6] is used. Let S ( v ) denote  the set of neighbours  of a vertex v , and let w uv denote  
the weight  of the edge connecting  vertices  u and v (if there is no such edge, then w u v = 0 ). Let a uv denote  an unweighted  
adjacency  matrix element,  i.e. a number  deﬁned  as follows:  
a u v = /braceleftbigg
1 , if there exists an edge connecting  u and v ; 
0 , otherwise.  
Then the weighted  clustering  coeﬃcient  of v is written  as: 
C w (v ) = 1 
str (v ) ·( deg (v ) −1 ) /summationdisplay 
u,t∈ S(v ) w v u + w v t 
2 a v u a ut a tv , (2) 
where summation  is over all pairs ( u, t ) of neighbours  of v . It is worth noting that if deg v = 0 or deg v = 1 , the clustering  
coeﬃcient  cannot be determined  from the above-given  formulas,  and it is assumed  that in such cases it is equal to 0. 

304 T. Stanisz, J. Kwapie ´n and S. Dro ˙zd ˙z / Information  Sciences 482 (2019) 301–320 
The above deﬁnitions  pertain  to the individual  vertices  of a network.  Global clustering  coeﬃcient  can be deﬁned  in more 
than one way; in this work a simple approach  based on averaging  the local clustering  coeﬃcients  is applied.  If V stands 
for the set of all vertices  of a network  and N is the number  of elements  in V , then the global clustering  coeﬃcient  of the 
network  is given by: 
C = 1 
N /summationdisplay 
v ∈ V C(v ) . (3) 
Here the subscript  “u ”o r “w ”, indicating  the unweighted  or weighted  network,  is omitted,  because  the formula  is identical  
in both cases. 
2.2.3. Average  shortest  path length 
In unweighted  networks,  the length of a path between  two vertices  is the number  of edges on that path. In weighted  
networks,  by the length of a path we understand  the sum of the reciprocals  of edge weights  on that path. The length of the 
shortest  path between  vertices  u and v is also called the distance  between  u and v and is denoted  by d ( u, v ). 
The average  shortest  path length /lscript ( v ) of a vertex v is the average  distance  from v to every other vertex in the network.  
It is a measure  of the centrality  of a vertex in the network,  and is given by the formula:  
/lscript (v ) = 1 
N −1 /summationdisplay 
u ∈ V \{ v } d(v , u ) , (4) 
in which V is the set of all vertices  of the network,  and N is the number  of elements  in V . 
The quantity  deﬁned  above has ﬁnite values only in connected  networks.  If there are at least two vertices  that are not 
connected  by any path, the distance  between  them is not deﬁned;  usually  it is treated  as inﬁnite,  and therefore  /lscript ( v ) cannot 
be calculated.  
Global average  shortest  path length is a quantity  describing  the whole network;  it is the average  distance  between  all 
pairs of vertices.  If local average  distances  /lscript ( v ) for all v in V are given, then the global mean distance  in the whole network  
can be expressed  by: 
/lscript = 1 
N /summationdisplay 
v ∈ V /lscript (v ) . (5) 
Formulas  4 and 5 apply both to unweighted  and weighted  networks;  the difference  between  the unweighted  and the 
weighted  average  shortest  path length lies in the deﬁnition  of the distance  in respective  cases. 
2.2.4. Assortativity  coeﬃcient  
Assortativity  is a global characteristic  of a network,  describing  the preference  for vertices  to attach to others that have 
similar  degree.  A network  is called assortative,  if vertices  with high degree tend to be directly  connected  with other vertices  
with high degree,  and low-degree  vertices  are typically  directly  connected  to vertices  which also have low degree.  In disas- 
sortative  networks,  the high-degree  nodes are typically  directly  connected  to the nodes with low degree.  In word-adjacency  
networks,  assortativity  provides  the information  about the extent to which frequent  words co-occur  with rare ones. 
In unweighted  networks,  the assortativity  coeﬃcient  can be deﬁned  as the Pearson  correlation  coeﬃcient  between  the 
degrees  of nodes that are connected  by an edge. Let ( u, v ) denote  the ordered  pair of vertices  that are connected  by an 
edge. Since edges are undirected  and the pair ( u, v ) is ordered,  two such pairs can be assigned  to each edge in the network.  
For each pair one can calculate  the degrees  of vertices  u and v , and form a pair ( deg (u ) , deg (v ) ) . The set of all pairs  
( deg (u ) , deg (v ) ) for all edges  can be treated  as the set of values of a certain  two-dimensional  random  variable  ( X, Y ). With 
such notation,  the assortativity  coeﬃcient  r u is expressed  by the Pearson  correlation  coeﬃcient  of variables  X and Y : 
r u = corr (X, Y ) . (6) 
The generalization  of the above formula  to weighted  networks  is done in this paper by replacing  the degrees  of vertices  
by their strengths,  and calculating  the weighted  correlation  coeﬃcient  instead  of normal  one. Let ( X, Y ) be a two-dimensional  
random  variable  whose values are pairs (x, y ) = ( str (u ) , str (v ) ) for all pairs of vertices  ( u, v ) connected  by an edge. Let w 
be a function  that to each pair (x, y ) = ( str (u ) , str (v ) ) assigns  the weight  of an edge connecting  u and v . Then the weighted  
assortativity  coeﬃcient  r w can be written  as: 
r w = wcorr (X, Y ;w ) , (7) 
where wcorr( X, Y ; w ) denotes  the Pearson  weighted  correlation  coeﬃcient  of variables  X and Y with the weighing  function  
w . This formula  is equivalent  to the one that can be found, for example,  in [26] . 

T. Stanisz, J. Kwapie ´n and S. Dro ˙zd ˙z / Information  Sciences 482 (2019) 301–320 305 
Since the assortativity  coeﬃcient  is expressed  by the correlation  coeﬃcient,  it has values between  -1 and 1. Networks  
with positive  r are assortative,  while networks  with negative  r are disassortative.  
2.2.5. Modularity  
Modularity  is a global characteristic  of a network,  measuring  the extent to which the set of network’s  vertices  can be 
divided  into disjunctive  subsets  which maximize  the density  of edges within them, and minimize  the number  of edges 
connecting  one with another.  In word-adjacency  networks,  it can be interpreted  as divisibility  of the set of words appearing  
in the text into groups  of words that frequently  co-occur  with each other. 
Consider  an unweighted  network,  with the set of vertices  V . By partition  of the network  we understand  the division  of V 
into disjoint  subsets  (called modules,  clusters  or communities).  Let a uv denote  the adjacency  matrix element  (deﬁned  the 
same as in Section  2.2.2 ). Let c v denote  the module  to which the vertex v is assigned  by the given partition.  The modularity  
of a partition  is deﬁned  as: 
q u = 1 
2 m /summationdisplay 
u, v ∈ V /parenleftbigg/bracketleftbigg
a u v −deg (u ) deg (v ) 
2 m /bracketrightbigg
δ(c u , c v ) /parenrightbigg
, (8) 
where m is the number  of the edges of the network,  deg (u ) , deg (v ) are degrees  of vertices  u and v , and function  δ( c u , c v ) 
has value 1 if c u = c v and 0 otherwise.  
Modularity  of a partition  has value between  -1 and 1, and indicates  whether  the density  of edges within the given groups  
is higher or lower than it would be if edges were distributed  at random.  The random  network  that serves as a reference  in 
this deﬁnition  can be constructed  using the so-called  conﬁguration  model [18] . 
The modularity  of a network  Q u is the maximum  value from modularities  q u of all possible  partitions.  Determining  the 
network’s  modularity  precisely  is computationally  intractable,  hence a number  of heuristic  algorithms  have been proposed.  
In this paper modularity  is calculated  using the Louvain  method  [7] . 
The generalization  of modularity  onto weighted  networks  can be done by replacing  the quantities  appearing  in Eq. (8) by 
their weighted  counterparts.  If w uv denotes  the weight  of the edge connecting  vertices  u and v, M is the sum of all edge 
weights,  and str( u ), str( v ) are the strengths  of vertices  u, v , then the modularity  of a given partition  is equal to: 
q w = 1 
2 M /summationdisplay 
u, v ∈ V /parenleftbigg/bracketleftbigg
w u v −str (u ) str (v ) 
2 M /bracketrightbigg
δ(c u , c v ) /parenrightbigg
. (9) 
Again, the weighted  modularity  of the network,  Q w , is the greatest  of modularities  obtained  in all possible  partitions  of the 
network.  
2.3. Characteristics’  normalization  
The studied  texts vary in length.  To allow for a reasonable  comparison  between  them, all calculated  quantities  are speciﬁ-  
cally normalized.  Normalization  of each network  characteristic  is achieved  by dividing  the value of the considered  parameter  
by the average  value of the same parameter  in a network  constructed  from the randomly  shuﬄed  text (see Fig. 3 ). As an 
example,  consider  any text and any of above-mentioned  quantities  ( Sections  2.2.1 –2.2.5 ), say, the assortativity  coeﬃcient  (it 
does not matter whether  the weighted  or the unweighted  version  is considered).  To obtain the normalized  (in described  
sense) value of the assortativity  coeﬃcient  related  to the given text, one needs to create the word-adjacency  network  from 
the text, and calculate  the assortativity  coeﬃcient  of this network,  r . Then the original  text needs to be subjected  to the 
random  shuﬄing  of words, k times (in this study, k = 50 was used). From each of the k obtained  “random  texts”, a net- 
work can be created,  in the same manner  as in the previous  step. Determining  the assortativity  coeﬃcients  for all of these 
networks  and calculating  their average  gives r /prime , the typical value of the assortativity  coeﬃcient  in the randomized  text. The 
normalized  value of the considered  parameter  - in this case, the assortativity  coeﬃcient  - is then /tildewide r = r /r /prime . It reﬂects  how 
the parameter  related  to the original  text is different  from the one obtained  for a text with the same word distribution,  but 
random  word order. The normalization  is performed  in the described  way for all mentioned  characteristics  ( Sections  2.2.1 –
2.2.5 ). Normalized  quantities  are denoted  with the symbol  “~” throughout  this paper ( Figs. 1 and 2 ). 
2.4. Data grouping  and classiﬁcation  methods  
To explore  the diversity  of investigated  networks’  properties,  two methods  of data analysis  were employed  in this paper - 
hierarchical  clustering  and decision  tree bagging.  The former  is a simple data clustering  method,  which, being an example  
of an unsupervised  machine  learning  technique,  attempts  to identify  the internal  structure  of a given set of data, based only 
on the data itself and on the assumed  measure  of similarity.  The latter is a supervised  learning  method  based on ensembles  
of decision  trees. 

306 T. Stanisz, J. Kwapie ´n and S. Dro ˙zd ˙z / Information  Sciences 482 (2019) 301–320 
Fig. 1. Unweighted  networks  with various assortativity  coeﬃcients.  The network in (a) is assortative  ( r = 0 . 74 ), the network in (b) is dissasortative  ( r = 
−0 . 82 ), and in the network in (c), the degrees of directly linked vertices are not correlated  (| r | < 0.01). In each network,  the vertices are colored according  
to their degree - blue, purple and red colors correspond  respectively  to low, medium and high degree. (For interpretation  of the references  to colour in 
this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) 
Fig. 2. Examples  of unweighted  networks  with (a) low modularity  ( Q u = 0 . 07 ) and (b) high modularity  ( Q u = 0 . 58 ). In ﬁgure b) the colors represent  the 
partition  which leads to the given value of modularity.  
2.4.1. Hierachical  clustering  
Hierarchical  clustering  [42] performed  on a given set of vectors,  aims to group together  the vectors  that are close to 
each other, according  to a certain  metric (a function  that deﬁnes  the distance  between  vectors).  The method,  as used in this 
paper, works as follows:  given an m -element  set of n -dimensional  vectors  of real numbers  and a metric (here the Euclidean  
metric was used), it starts from creating  m clusters  and assigning  one vector to each cluster.  Then the clusters  that are 
closest to each other are merged  into one, and this is repeated  until there is only one cluster.  As clusters  are not vectors,  
but sets of vectors,  the distance  between  such sets must be deﬁned,  to allow for determining  which are closest to each 
other. This can be done in multiple  ways, here the so-called  furthest  neighbour  method  was applied.  It deﬁnes  the distance  
between  two clusters  as the greatest  distance  between  pairs of elements  of these clusters  (each element  in a pair belongs  
to other cluster).  
The result of clustering  can be presented  in the form of a dendrogram  - a tree-like  diagram  which shows the consecutive  
merges  and allows to determine  what kind of clusters  can be discerned  within the dataset.  
2.4.2. Decision  tree bagging  
Statistical  classiﬁcation  with decision  trees [41] is an example  of supervised  learning,  which means that it allows for the 
categorization  of data, provided  that it is given a set of already  categorized  examples,  called the training  set. 
Creating  an ensemble  of decision  trees requires  constructing  individual  trees in the ﬁrst place. Let A denote  the set of n - 
dimensional  vectors  of real numbers;  elements  of A are called observations,  and their coordinates  are called attributes.  Each 
observation  is labeled  with one of K categories,  also called classes.  The training  of a single classiﬁcation  tree consists  of: con- 
sidering  all possible  one-dimensional  splits of A , selecting  and executing  the best split , and repeating  these steps recursively  
in the resulting  subsets;  splitting  stops when A is partitioned  in such a way that each subset contains  observations  of only 
one category.  The one-dimensional  split related  to some attribute  x i is the choice of a constant  number  S and grouping  the 
observations  according  to whether  their coordinate  x i is smaller  or greater  than S . The best split is the one that maximizes  
the decrease  of the diversity  of distribution  of classes  in the considered  set. The diversity  can be measured,  for example,  by 
information  entropy:  H = −/summationtext K 
k =1 p k log p k ( p k denotes  the fraction  of the observations  in the set that belong to category  k ). 
In such case, the maximization  of diversity  decrease  is equivalent  to the maximization  of the quantity  H 0 −H split , where H 0 

T. Stanisz, J. Kwapie ´n and S. Dro ˙zd ˙z / Information  Sciences 482 (2019) 301–320 307 
Fig. 3. An unweighted  word-adjacency  network and its randomization.  Figure (a) presents the network created from one sentence  excerpted  from The Fed- 
eralist Paper No. 1 by Alexander  Hamilton.  Figure (b) shows the network created from the same piece of text, but with randomly  shuﬄed words. Performing  
such shuﬄing  repeatedly  leads to obtaining  a set of randomized  networks  which serve as a benchmark  in the calculation  of normalized  characteristics  of 
the original network.  Note that the punctuation  is taken into consideration  in the construction  of network;  comma and full stop are denoted by “#com”
and “#dot”, respectively.  
is the initial entropy,  and H split is the weighted  sum of entropies  in the resulting  subsets,  with weights  proportional  to the 
numbers  of elements  in these subsets  and adding  up to 1. 
The scheme  of the consecutive  splits of A is equivalent  to a system  of conditions  imposed  on the observations’  attributes;  
such system  is a classiﬁcation  tree. A trained  tree can be used to categorize  observations  with unknown  class membership,  
by assigning  them to appropriate  subsets  of A , according  to the conditions  fulﬁlled  by their components.  
Classiﬁcation  with a single decision  tree may suffer form instability,  which means that the classiﬁer  may produce  signif- 
icantly different  results for only slightly  different  training  sets. Also, decision  trees are prone to overﬁtting,  which leads to 
decrease  of classiﬁcation  accuracy  of unknown  observations.  
Decision  tree bagging  ( bootstrap  aggregating  ) [41] is a method  of enhancing  the performance  of classiﬁcation  based on 
decision  tress. Given a training  set with m observations,  one can create N new training  sets of size m , by sampling  with 
replacement  from the original  set. Obtained  sets, called bootstrap  samples,  for large m are expected  to have the fraction  
1 −1 /e (which  is roughly  63.2%) of the unique  observations  from the original  set, the rest being duplicates.  A decision  tree 
is trained  on each of the bootstrap  samples,  and the ensemble  of N trees becomes  a new classiﬁer.  When such an ensemble  
is given an observation  to classify,  each tree being its part classiﬁes  the observation  on its own, and then the class that was 
chosen  by most of trees becomes  the ﬁnal result of classiﬁcation.  
A typical method  of verifying  the performance  of classiﬁcation  is cross-validation  [4] . Its general  idea is dividing  the set 
A of observations  with known  class membership  into two disjoint  sets: the training  set A train and the test set A test . The 
classiﬁer  is trained  on A train and then it classiﬁes  the observations  in A test , treating  them as if their class memberships  were 
unknown.  Then the results are compared  with the true class memberships  of elements  of A test , and the number  of correct  
matches  indicates  the classiﬁer’s  performance.  Partitioning  A , training  the classiﬁer,  and testing its performance  is repeated  
a certain  number  of times, and the average  result becomes  the ﬁnal assessment  of classiﬁcation’s  accuracy.  The methods  and 
rules of partitioning  A may vary; the approach  utilized  in this paper is the repeated  random  sub-sampling  validation  (also 
called Monte Carlo validation),  with stratiﬁcation.  It simply performs  an independent  random  stratiﬁed  partition  in each 
iteration,  and each partition  obeys a ﬁxed proportion  of the numbers  of elements  in the training  and test set. Stratiﬁcation  
ensures  that all classes  are equally  represented  in the training  set. 

308 T. Stanisz, J. Kwapie ´n and S. Dro ˙zd ˙z / Information  Sciences 482 (2019) 301–320 
Fig. 4. The dendrogram  of hierarchical  clustering  of all books listed in Appendix,  in the space of unweighted  global characteristics  of networks  . Red 
squares and blue dots denote English and Polish texts, respectively.  The dashed line separates  two general clusters, corresponding  to distinct languages.  
The books falling into the “wrong” clusters  are: Faraon, Lalka, Emancypantki  (Polish), Animal Farm, The Prince and the Pauper (English).  (For interpretation  
of the references  to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) 
2.5. Computational  issues 
The computational  effort needed  to perform  the classiﬁcation  depends  on the choice of classiﬁers’  type, which is not 
necessarily  restricted  to decision  trees and their ensembles.  Analysis  of networks,  on the other hand, is based on algorithms  
whose exact running  time can be found in the literature;  it may depend  on the type of network  (whether  it is a sparse 
network,  for example)  and its representation  (adjacency  matrix,  adjacency  list, etc.). However,  it is worth mentioning  which 
stages are crucial for the overall processing  time. For networks  of sizes as studied  in this paper, the only noticeably  time- 
consuming  part of network  characteristics’  computation  is determining  the global average  shortest  path length,  as it requires  
ﬁnding  all shortest  paths in a graph. To illustrate  with an example:  for the network  constructed  from Charles  Dickens’  David 
Copperﬁeld  (the longest  English-language  book considered  in the analysis)  computing  all network  parameters  that do not 
rely on determining  shortest  paths (namely,  all vertex degrees  and clustering  coeﬃcients,  assortativity,  modularity)  both in 
unweighted  and weighted  version,  takes 1.8 s on the PC used to perform  the presented  analysis  (2.7 GHz CPU, 12 GB RAM). 
Obtaining  average  shortest  path length (local) of the nodes corresponding  to 100 most frequent  words requires  0.1 s and 
0.8 s, for the unweighted  and weighted  network,  respectively.  But getting  global average  shortest  path length takes 12.3 s 
for unweighted,  and 141.3 s for the weighted  network.  Considering  that the characteristics’  normalization  requires  repeating  
the computations  for a number  of randomized  networks,  it makes analysing  the global shortest-path-related  properties  of 
networks  rather impractical.  However,  as shown below, it turns out that global characteristics  are not as effective  at distin- 
guishing  between  authors  as local ones; furthermore,  among  studied  network  characteristics,  these related  to the lengths  
of shortest  paths seem to have the weakest  discriminative  potential.  Therefore,  for practical  purposes,  they can be omitted  
without  the loss of accuracy  of the proposed  approach.  
3. Results  
3.1. Global characteristics  of unweighted  networks  
At the beginning,  the unweighted  networks  are studied,  as they are simpler  and less computationally  demanding  than 
the weighted  ones. Each of the books listed in Appendix  is converted  into a network.  Then the unweighted  global param-  
eters are calculated  (all normalized,  as described  in Section  2.3 ): average  shortest  path length /tildewide /lscript u , clustering  coeﬃcient  /tildewide C u , 
assortativity  coeﬃcient  /tildewide r u and modularity  /tildewide Q u . The obtained  sets of quantities  are treated  as vectors  in 4-dimensional  Eu- 
clidean  space; each vector corresponds  to one text, and each parameter  corresponds  to one component  of a vector. The 
Euclidean  distance  is introduced  as the measure  of similarity  (the greater  the distance,  the lesser the similarity),  and hier- 
archical  clustering  is applied.  The result indicates  clear separation  of the books with respect  to the language  ( Fig. 4 ). The 
books cluster into two groups,  each related  to one language;  only a few of them fall into the “wrong” group.  

T. Stanisz, J. Kwapie ´n and S. Dro ˙zd ˙z / Information  Sciences 482 (2019) 301–320 309 
Fig. 5. The dendrograms  of the hierarchical  clustering  of (a) English and (b) Polish books, in the space of unweighted  global characteristics  of networks  . 
Each text is labeled by the surname  of its author. 
The set of books is then divided  according  to the language,  and hierarchical  clustering  is performed  again, in the already  
separated  sets of books in English  and Polish. The outcome  of this analysis  ( Fig. 5 ) reveals  the emergence  of small clusters  
(consisting  of 2–3 texts) corresponding  to certain  authors.  This suggests  the existence  of connection  between  the authorship  
of the text and the structure  of related  network,  expressed  by appropriate  quantities.  Such hypothesis  may also be supported  
by analysing  the samples  of text much shorter  than the whole books. Fig. 6 presents  the plots of characteristics  /lscript u , Q u , C u of 
networks  that are created  from text samples  randomly  drawn from the books of selected  authors,  each sample  containing  
50 0 0 words. It can be observed  that although  derived  from different  books, the networks  corresponding  to texts of the 
same author tend to be similar  in terms of calculated  characteristics.  This effect is present  for any 3-dimensional  plot of an 
arbitrarily  chosen  triad of the studied  characteristics  /lscript u , Q u , C u , r u . 
To further  examine  the capability  of network  parameters  of texts to distinguish  between  authors,  statistical  classiﬁcation  
by an ensemble  of decision  trees is applied.  The analysis  is performed  in the following  way. For a given language,  4 randomly  
chosen  books of each author are taken to form the training  set, and the remaining  2 books contribute  to the test set. 
Then the classiﬁer  (an ensemble  of 100 decision  trees) is trained  on the training  set to categorize  books with respect  to 
their author - each book constitutes  one observation,  whose attributes  are the calculated  network  parameters.  After that, 
the classiﬁer  categorizes  observations  in the test set. Picking  training  and test sets, training  the classiﬁer,  and performing  
classiﬁcation  in the test set is repeated  10,0 0 0 times. The average  accuracy  of classiﬁer  (the fraction  of correct  classiﬁcations)  
in the test set is treated  as a measure  of the possibility  to distinguish  between  the authors.  The reasoning  behind  this 
approach  can be understood  as follows:  the greater  the dissimilarities  between  individual  authors  (in terms of the network  
parameters),  the easier it should be to train an accurate  classiﬁer  and to categorize  the observations  in the test set correctly.  
Thus, the classiﬁer’s  performance,  which is given by the average  accuracy  in the test set, may serve as an indicator  of 
network  parameters’  potential  to distinguish  between  different  writing  styles. If the texts were not distinguishable  at all, 
the classiﬁcation  would not be much different  from a random  choice,  and in that case the average  accuracy  would be equal 
to 1/ n , where n denotes  the number  of considered  authors.  

310 T. Stanisz, J. Kwapie ´n and S. Dro ˙zd ˙z / Information  Sciences 482 (2019) 301–320 
Fig. 6. The projections  of the triplets of network characteristics  ( /lscript u , Q u , C u ) onto planes ( /lscript u , Q u ), ( /lscript u , C u ), ( Q u , C u ), for texts in English (a, b) and Polish 
(c, d). Each triplet of characteristics  pertains to one chunk of text of length 50 0 0 words. Texts samples were randomly  chosen from all of the studied works 
of considered  authors. Different  markers denote different  authors - red dots, green triangles  and blue squares denote respectively:  Charles Dickens, Daniel 
Defoe and Mark Twain in (a), George Eliot, Jane Austen, Joseph Conrad in (b), Władysław  Reymont,  Janusz Korczak, Jan Lam in (c) and Henryk Sienkiewicz,  
Józef Ignacy Kraszewski,  Stefan ˙Zeromski in (d).  It can be seen that points representing texts of different  authors tend to occupy different regions of space.  
Note that the characteristics  are not normalized,  as all the samples have the same length. (For interpretation  of the references  to colour in this ﬁgure 
legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) 
The detailed  results of the classiﬁcation  are presented  in Table 1 , which is organized  as follows:  a number  in the i th row 
and j th column  is the probability  of classifying  a text of the i th author as a text of the j th author,  obtained  by counting  
such classiﬁcations  in the test set and dividing  the number  of counts by the number  of performed  repetitions  of the test set 
selections  (10 0 0 0). The probabilities  of correct  classiﬁcations  reside on the diagonal  of the table. The sum of values in each 
row is equal to 1 - as it is the probability  of assigning  a text to any available  author;  the sums of values in columns  are not 
given any constraint,  as they do not have the interpretation  of probability.  
The obtained  overall average  accuracies  of classiﬁers  (the overall probabilities  of correct  classiﬁcations)  in the test set are: 
35% with standard  deviation  of 10% for English,  and 41% with standard  deviation  of 10% for Polish. Although  these values 
are higher than 12.5% corresponding  to a random  choice,  they are still too low to state that texts are clearly separated.  
Therefore  it is reasonable  to look for possible  improvements.  This is done by including  the weighted  versions  of the network  
parameters  in the calculation,  in the next step of the analysis.  

T. Stanisz, J. Kwapie ´n and S. Dro ˙zd ˙z / Information  Sciences 482 (2019) 301–320 311 
At this point, it is worth noting that the results obtained  by the clustering  and the classiﬁcation  are in decent accordance  
with each other. Comparing  Fig. 5 and Table 1 reveals  that the texts of the authors  who are likely to be correctly  classiﬁed  
are typically  grouped  together  in clustering  (for example,  the texts of D. Defoe, J. Kraszewski,  J. Lam), while the texts of 
authors  weakly  distinguished  in classiﬁcation  are scattered  over the dendrogram  (C. Dickens,  J. Korczak).  
3.2. Including  weighted  characteristics  
The analysis  of weighted  network  parameters  is performed  in the same manner  as in the case of the unweighted  ones. 
The whole procedure  described  above is repeated,  but this time the networks  created  from texts are weighted  networks,  and 
the characteristics  (average  shortest  path length,  clustering  coeﬃcient,  assortativity  coeﬃcient,  modularity)  are calculated  in 
both the unweighted  and the weighted  version.  The vectors  of parameters  calculated  for each book (this time they are 
8-dimensional)  again serve as an input of data clustering  and classiﬁcation  algorithms.  
Table 2 presents  the outcome  of the classiﬁcation.  It can be seen that including  weighted  network  characteristics  into 
analysis  gives a slight improvement  of the distinguishability  between  the English-language  authors  - the overall average  
accuracy  of English  texts classiﬁcation  is 42% with standard  deviation  of 11%. For Polish books, the increase  in the classiﬁer’s  
performance  is rather negligible,  the accuracy  obtained  is 44% with standard  deviation  of 11%. For some individual  authors,  
the probability  of correct  classiﬁcation  decreases  after including  the weighted  characteristics  of networks.  The results of 
hierarchical  clustering  in the space with 4 additional  dimensions  do not change  signiﬁcantly  - they are analogous  to what 
can be seen in Fig. 5 ; for this reason the dendrograms  are not presented  here. 
The classiﬁcation  of texts using only weighted  characteristics  /tildewider /lscript w , /tildewider Q w , /tildewider C w , /tildewide r w gives results very similar  to these from 
the analysis  of the unweighted  networks  - the classiﬁcation  accuracy  for English  and Polish is 37% and 41% with standard  
deviations  of 11% and 10%, respectively.  This similarity  along with the fact that the classiﬁcation  for both the unweighted  
and weighted  parameters  together  is not much more accurate,  suggests  that the information  carried  by these two types of 
characteristics  is to a large extent overlapping.  
3.3. Local characteristics  
The analysis  of local parameters  of networks  is an approach  different  from what has been done in previous  steps. Instead  
of studying  the properties  of texts by determining  the quantities  describing  the structure  of the whole networks,  here the 
characteristics  of the individual  vertices  (words)  are considered.  In each language,  n most frequently  occurring  words are 
chosen  from the whole set of texts. Each book is transformed  into a network,  and the characteristics  of vertices  correspond-  
ing to selected  words are determined.  The characteristics  taken into account  are: vertex degree,  local clustering  coeﬃcient,  
and average  shortest  path length,  all in both the unweighted  and weighted  versions.  All of these quantities  are normalized,  
in the same manner  as in previous  calculations  - by dividing  their value by the average  value obtained  for the same word 
in a randomized  network.  Vertex strength  (weighted  degree)  is an exception  here - since it is equal to the frequency  of the 
related  word multiplied  by 2 (and frequency  is invariant  under text randomization),  its normalized  value should be equal to 
1 for any word. Therefore  /tildewider str (v ) , the normalized  strength  of a vertex v , is deﬁned  as the strength  of vertex v in the original  
network,  divided  by the sum of strengths  of all vertices  in the same network:  /tildewider str (v ) = str (v ) / /summationtext 
u ∈ V str (u ) . This is equal to 
the word’s relative  frequency  (the fraction  of the total number  of words in the text that comes from the occurrences  of the 
considered  word). 
The sets of parameters  related  to the n most frequent  words in each text are again supplied  to the data clustering  and 
classiﬁcation  algorithms.  Fig. 7 presents  the dendrogram  of the clustering  in the 12-dimensional  space of the weighted  
clustering  coeﬃcients  of n = 12 most frequent  words. The results of text classiﬁcation  in this space are shown in Table 3 . 
The obtained  overall classiﬁcation  accuracy  is 90% with standard  deviation  of 8% for English  texts, and 86% with standard  
deviation  of 8% for the Polish ones. 
The choice of the number  of words, n = 12 , and the weighted  clustering  coeﬃcient  /tildewide C w as the only parameter  to consider  
in the above example  is justiﬁed  by studying  the effectiveness  of classiﬁcation  with each of the network  characteristics  
separately.  It can be noticed  ( Fig. 8 ) that the weighted  clustering  coeﬃcient  gives the best results in English  and one of 
the best in Polish for a wide range of the most frequent  words studied.  In both languages,  it is suﬃcient  to analyse  the 
11–12 most frequent  words to obtain the accuracy  of 85–90%;  further  increase  in the number  of words does not improve  
the classiﬁer’s  performance.  
From the results obtained,  it can be obviously  concluded  that analysing  the local parameters  of selected  words leads to 
much better distinguishability  between  the authors  than studying  the global characteristics  of the networks.  In the “local 
approach” the  number  of considered  attributes  of each text can be much greater  than when studying  the networks  globally,  
as one can choose  the number  of analysed  words arbitrary.  However,  even for equal dimension  of the attribute  space, the 
networks’  local properties  (weighted  clustering  coeﬃcient,  for example)  provide  the signiﬁcantly  higher texts’ classiﬁcation  
accuracy.  
It can be found in the literature  on computational  stylometry  that a very often utilized  approach  to authorship  attri- 
bution is representing  a text as a collection  of words along with their frequencies  (the so-called  bag-of-words  representa-  
tion), and comparing  particular  words’ frequencies  is among  the most reliable  methods  to discriminate  between  authors  
[20,29,33,39,44,49]  . As mentioned  in Section  2 , the normalized  node strength  in a weighted  word-adjacency  network  is 

312 T. Stanisz, J. Kwapie ´n and S. Dro ˙zd ˙z / Information  Sciences 482 (2019) 301–320 
Fig. 7. The dendrograms  of the hierarchical  clustering  of (a) English and (b) Polish books, in the space of the weighted  clustering  coeﬃcients  of networks’  
nodes, corresponding  to 12 most frequent  words . Each text is labeled by the surname  of its author. 
Fig. 8. The classiﬁcation  of books in the feature spaces constructed  from a single network parameter  determined  for a set of n words occurring  most 
frequently  in the whole collection  of books. Charts (a) and (b) present the average classiﬁcation  error as a function of n , for English and Polish books, 
respectively.  Each point on a chart represents  the average classiﬁcation  error in the test set, obtained  in one experiment.  One experiment  consists of 
selecting  the n most frequent words, calculating  one network parameter  for each of these words in each text, and performing  the cross-validation  of 
classiﬁcation  in the so obtained  n -dimensional  space, 10 0 0 0 times. The studied network characteristics  are (all normalized):  vertex degree and strength 
( /tildewidest deg (v ) , /tildewider str (v ) ), unweighted  and weighted  average shortest path length ( /tildewide /lscript u (v ) , /tildewide /lscript w (v ) ), unweighted  and weighted  clustering  coeﬃcient  ( /tildewide C u (v ) , /tildewide C w (v ) ). 

T. Stanisz, J. Kwapie ´n and S. Dro ˙zd ˙z / Information  Sciences 482 (2019) 301–320 313 
Fig. 9. The classiﬁcation  of books in the feature spaces constructed  from the sets of network parameters,  determined  for a set of n words occurring  most 
frequently  in the whole collection  of books. Charts (a) and (b) present the average (obtained  from 10,0 0 0 repetitions  of cross-validation)  classiﬁcation  error 
in the test set, as a function of n , for English and Polish books, respectively.  3 sets of quantities  describing  words in texts were investigated,  namely: (1) 
normalized  vertex strength /tildewider str (v ) , (2) normalized  weighted  clustering  coeﬃcient  /tildewide C w (v ) , (3) normalized  vertex strength /tildewider str (v ) together with normalized  
weighted  clustering  coeﬃcient  /tildewide C w (v ) . 
equal to the corresponding  word’s relative  frequency;  therefore  network  analysis  may be viewed  as a generalization  of the 
bag-of-words  approach:  it incorporates  all the information  about the numbers  of word occurrences.  
The fact that the word frequency  works well in identifying  authors  can be observed  in Fig. 8 . The classiﬁcation  based 
on normalized  vertex strength  leads to the best or one of the best results among  all the studied  network  characteristics.  A 
question  arises, whether  it is viable to introduce  the network  formalism  when a satisfying  result can be obtained  by studying  
only the numbers  of word occurrences.  It turns out that a proﬁt can be made from combining  the purely network-based  
parameters  with the frequencies.  For example,  a classiﬁcation  in the space constructed  from both the relative  frequencies  
and the normalized  weighted  clustering  coeﬃcients  leads to accuracy  higher than achievable  by any of the two methods  
separately,  of course at the cost of doubling  the dimension  of attribute  space. This is shown in Fig. 9 . Furthermore,  these 
two parameters  seem to exploit  all the available  information  that is useful with respect  to authorship  recognition,  because  
including  further  network  characteristics  into the classiﬁcation  does not improve  its accuracy.  
From a practical  point of view, the above result may be useful in classifying  texts in which the set of available  words 
is limited.  This may happen,  for example,  when studied  texts are much shorter  than these considered  here and the words 
that are the most frequent  there are topic-speciﬁc  and do not carry valuable  information  about an individual  writing  style. 
According  to the Zipf’s law, the frequency  of the n th most frequent  word in a text is proportional  to 1/ n , so the number  of 
words with the number  of occurrences  high enough  to be reasonably  included  into analysis  decreases  substantially  when 
texts are shorter.  
The results presented  in Fig. 8 may suggest  which properties  of the networks  seem to be in a way universal  for the 
language,  and which differ among  authors.  Aside from word frequency,  the weighted  clustering  coeﬃcient  turned out to be 
most effective  in capturing  the diversity  of writing  styles, when considering  both the English  and Polish texts. Clustering  
coeﬃcient  C w ( v ) (unnormalized)  of a vertex v describes  the structure  of the neighbourhood  of v - it measures  the contri- 
bution to the strength  of v coming  from pairs of its neighbours  that are connected  by an edge. The normalized  coeﬃcient,  
/tildewide C w (v ) , reﬂects  the deviation  of this structure  from the structure  that would be typically  observed  in a randomized  net- 
work. The fact that it allows for a quite accurate  classiﬁcation  suggests  that the organization  of such local structures  in the 
word-adjacency  networks  may be considered  as a feature  of individual  language  that is able to distinguish  one author from 
another.  
On the other hand, the average  shortest  path length,  especially  in its weighted  version,  gives the weakest  classiﬁer.  Thus, 
one may anticipate  that this quantity  is shared among  the word-adjacency  networks  even when they are associated  with 
different  language  users. Indeed,  during the construction  of a word-adjacency  network  from any suﬃciently  long text, a 
set of the most frequent  words form a densely-connected  cluster.  Such cluster is a subnetwork,  whose any two vertices  
are connected  by a path of low length.  This can be noticed  when comparing  the average  shortest  path length in such a 
subnetwork,  /lscript sub , with the average  shortest  path length in the whole network,  /lscript . Fig. 11 presents  the strip charts of the 
distributions  of the quotient  /lscript sub / /lscript , for all the studied  networks,  with the subnetworks  consisting  of the 50 most frequent  
words. For the unweighted  networks,  the value of /lscript sub / /lscript is usually  around  0.4-0.5  (because  the smallest  possible  distance  
between  two distinct  vertices  is equal to 1); however,  in weighted  networks  it is typically  smaller  than 0.1 (as distances  can 
be made arbitrarily  small when edges’ weight  increase).  Hence, in the weighted  networks,  for any v being one of, say, the 
50 most frequent  words, the local average  shortest  path length /lscript ( v ) has roughly  the same value. This is the reason why the 

314 T. Stanisz, J. Kwapie ´n and S. Dro ˙zd ˙z / Information  Sciences 482 (2019) 301–320 
Fig. 10. The scatterplot  of the error rates of pairwise  classiﬁcations  and the time intervals  separating  classiﬁed  writers. Each marker denotes one pair of 
authors - squares for English, and dots for Polish language.  All points with time interval greater than 100 years, except one, correspond  to pairs in which 
one author is Daniel Defoe. These points are labeled with writers’ names, abbreviated  in the same manner as in Tables 1–3 . For the rest of pairs, the 
scatterplot  is presented  in more detail in the inset. 
average  shortest  path length gives a poor insight  into the way of using particular  words by different  authors.  The existence  
of a cluster with high edge density,  composed  of the most frequent  words, is observable  both in original  and randomized  
networks;  therefore  it can be viewed  as an effect of the principle  of word-adjacency  network  construction,  related  to the 
word frequency  distribution.  
It may be interesting  how including  punctuation  into the calculations  affects the distinguishability  of authors.  It turns out 
that the utilized  approach  of treating  punctuation  marks as usual words [22] is justiﬁed:  the classiﬁcation  accuracy  decreases  
if punctuation  is removed,  even when the dimension  of the attribute  space is preserved  (the removed  punctuation  marks 
are replaced  with subsequent  words from the list of the most frequent  words).  For example,  for the normalized  weighted  
clustering  coeﬃcient,  /tildewide C w (v ) , of n = 12 the most frequent  words (not including  punctuation  marks),  the average  classiﬁcation  
accuracy  is 75% for English  and 76% for Polish. A substantial  drop from the values obtained  previously  suggests  that the role 
of punctuation  in expressing  individual  writing  style is non-negligible.  
Another  interesting  subject  is how the classiﬁcation  is affected  by the length of the timespan  during which the studied  
books were published.  The publication  dates of the studied  books vary from 1719 to 1949. It is well known  that language  
evolves  over time; some aspects  of its evolution  can be captured  by quantitave  means and related  to the processes  taking 
place in a society  and its culture  [24,25,31]  . Such cultural  and linguistic  changes  may possibly  affect authorship  attribution  - 
it can be suspected  that literary  works written  around  the same time are more likely to be confused  than these separated  by 
a long time interval.  In order to get some preliminary  insight  into this issue (based on the texts selected  here), the following  
approach  is utilized.  For each author,  a “time centroid” is  determined  as an arithmetic  mean of publication  dates of the 
works studied  in this paper. Then a distance  between  the centroids  (in years) is assigned  to each pair of authors  and treated  
as a time interval  separating  them. Next, for each two authors  a classiﬁcation  considering  only their works is performed  
multiple  times (feature  space consists  of weighted  degrees  and clustering  coeﬃcients  of the 12 most frequent  words;  the 
texts of each author are split into training  and test set with ratio 4:2). The error rates in such pairwise  classiﬁcations  (for 
each pair of authors)  are then plotted  versus time intervals  ( Fig. 10 ) to assess whether  the authors  separated  by greater  
time intervals  are easier to distinguish  between  or not. At the ﬁrst glance,  it seems that in the case of English,  for the 
writers  who are separated  by more than 100 years the probability  of misclassiﬁcation  is lower than 2%, while for others it 
varies more signiﬁcantly.  However,  it must be noticed  that all except one time interval  greater  than 100 years pertain  to 
Daniel Defoe, who lived much earlier than the rest of the writers.  When considering  only the time intervals  shorter  than 
100 years ( Fig. 10 , inset), no clear relationship  between  the classiﬁcation’s  accuracy  and the length of the time interval  
separating  authors  can be observed.  It must be remembered  though,  that these results do not pretend  to be general  - 
they apply to the set of studied  texts, but not necessarily  to other sets of literary  works;  the reliable  analysis  of the effect 
of language  evolution  on authorship  attribution,  possibly  with the proposed  approach,  would require  texts from a larger 
timespan.  
Two additional  remarks  regarding  the obtained  results can be made. Firstly, it can be noticed  in Fig. 9 that for the Polish 
books, reaching  the limit of the classiﬁcation  accuracy  requires  less words than for the books in English  (it is most visible in 

T. Stanisz, J. Kwapie ´n and S. Dro ˙zd ˙z / Information  Sciences 482 (2019) 301–320 315 
Fig. 11. The distributions  of the quantity /lscript sub / /lscript , for networks  constructed  from (a) English and (b) Polish books. /lscript sub denotes the global average shortest 
path length in a subnetwork  consisting  of 50 most frequent words, and /lscript denotes the average shortest path length in the whole network.  Both original and 
randomized  networks  are considered,  in both weighted  and unweighted  version. 
Table 1 
The results of the classiﬁcation  of (a) English (b) Polish books with respect to the authorship,  in the space of unweighted  global characteristics  of 
networks  . A number in the i th row and j th column is the probability  of classifying  a text of i th author as a text of j th author. 
The classiﬁcation  of English books. The authors are denoted by the two ﬁrst letters of their surnames:  Au - Austen, Co - Conrad, De - Defoe, Di - 
Dickens, Do - Doyle, El - Eliot, Or - Orwell, Tw - Twain. 
Au Co De Di Do El Or Tw 
Au .33 .22 .17 .06 .01 .11 .10 .00 
Co .08 .34 .01 .21 .02 .11 .14 .09 
De .21 .00 .54 .00 .09 .04 .12 .00 
Di .18 .21 .00 .05 .23 .18 .08 .07 
Do .00 .12 .06 .09 .28 .03 .24 .18 
El .10 .22 .16 .05 .04 .39 .04 .00 
Or .10 .04 .09 .07 .23 .12 .18 .17 
Tw .00 .00 .00 .03 .12 .16 .03 .66 
The classiﬁcation  of Polish books. The authors are denoted by the two ﬁrst letters of their surnames:  Ko - Korczak, Kr - Kraszewski,  La - Lam, Or - 
Orzeszkowa,  Pr - Prus, Re - Reymont,  Si - Sienkiewicz,  ˙Ze - ˙Zeromski.  
Ko Kr La Or Pr Re Si ˙Ze 
Ko .18 .23 .14 .18 .04 .00 .09 .14 
Kr .16 .57 .00 .02 .00 .18 .03 .04 
La .21 .06 .54 .02 .05 .00 .08 .04 
Or .14 .00 .02 .26 .11 .00 .22 .25 
Pr .02 .00 .09 .12 .65 .00 .10 .02 
Re .05 .21 .00 .01 .00 .44 .07 .22 
Si .04 .00 .18 .21 .09 .00 .46 .02 
˙Ze .19 .10 .01 .32 .00 .17 .00 .21 
the case of classiﬁcation  based on /tildewider str (v ) and on both /tildewider str (v ) and /tildewide C (v ) ). Secondly,  the differences  between  the accuracies  of 
classiﬁcation  based on the weighted  network  characteristics  and the accuracies  of classiﬁcation  employing  the characteristics  
in unweighted  version,  are smaller  for the Polish texts than for the English  ones. This can be observed  in Fig. 8 , for example,  
for the clustering  coeﬃcient.  
These effects may perhaps  be related  to the general  structural  differences  between  the languages:  while in Polish, like 
in all Slavic languages,  the syntactic  role of a word in a sentence  is determined  mainly  by inﬂection,  the English  syntax 
relies more on the word order and on utilizing  function  words (articles,  auxiliary  verbs, etc). Function  words are among  

316 T. Stanisz, J. Kwapie ´n and S. Dro ˙zd ˙z / Information  Sciences 482 (2019) 301–320 
Table 2 
The results of the classiﬁcation  of (a) English (b) Polish books with respect to the authorship,  in the space of unweighted  and weighted  global character-  
istics of networks  . A number in the i -th row and j -th column is the probability  of classifying  a text of i -th author as a text of j -th author. 
The classiﬁcation  of English books. The authors are denoted by the two ﬁrst letters of their surnames:  Au - Austen, Co - Conrad, De - Defoe, Di - 
Dickens, Do - Doyle, El - Eliot, Or - Orwell, Tw - Twain. 
Au Co De Di Do El Or Tw 
Au .20 .17 .18 .12 .00 .22 .11 .00 
Co .12 .62 .00 .06 .02 .07 .03 .08 
De .11 .00 .52 .11 .09 .14 .01 .02 
Di .16 .03 .03 .21 .22 .18 .09 .08 
Do .02 .10 .00 .22 .33 .01 .14 .18 
El .17 .16 .13 .04 .00 .46 .00 .04 
Or .06 .03 .05 .04 .05 .01 .55 .21 
Tw .00 .01 .03 .02 .10 .13 .22 .49 
The classiﬁcation  of Polish books. The authors are denoted by the two ﬁrst letters of their surnames:  Ko - Korczak, Kr - Kraszewski,  La - Lam, Or - 
Orzeszkowa,  Pr - Prus, Re - Reymont,  Si - Sienkiewicz,  ˙Ze - ˙Zeromski.  
Ko Kr La Or Pr Re Si ˙Ze 
Ko .22 .22 .16 .09 .01 .01 .15 .14 
Kr .21 .35 .03 .07 .01 .29 .00 .04 
La .06 .04 .55 .05 .12 .00 .03 .15 
Or .16 .04 .02 .34 .13 .00 .12 .19 
Pr .01 .00 .08 .18 .63 .00 .10 .00 
Re .01 .12 .00 .00 .00 .50 .18 .19 
Si .10 .00 .07 .06 .15 .01 .61 .00 
˙Ze .22 .03 .08 .08 .00 .28 .00 .31 
Table 3 
The results of the classiﬁcation  of (a) English (b) Polish books with respect to the authorship,  in the space of the weighted  clustering  coeﬃcient  of 
networks’  nodes, corresponding  to 12 most frequent  words . A number in the i -th row and j -th column is the probability  of classifying  a text of i -th 
author as a text of j -th author. 
The classiﬁcation  of English books. The authors are denoted by the two ﬁrst letters of their surnames:  Au - Austen, Co - Conrad, De - Defoe, Di - 
Dickens, Do - Doyle, El - Eliot, Or - Orwell, Tw - Twain. 
Au Co De Di Do El Or Tw 
Au .96 .00 .00 .01 .01 .02 .00 .00 
Co .00 .92 .00 .00 .00 .04 .04 .00 
De .00 .00 1.0 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 
Di .01 .00 .00 .88 .04 .00 .00 .07 
Do .01 .00 .00 .05 .93 .01 .00 .00 
El .02 .02 .00 .03 .01 .87 .02 .03 
Or .00 .13 .00 .01 .01 .07 .78 .00 
Tw .00 .01 .00 .00 .01 .02 .07 .89 
The classiﬁcation  of Polish books. The authors are denoted by the two ﬁrst letters of their surnames:  Ko - Korczak, Kr - Kraszewski,  La - Lam, Or - 
Orzeszkowa,  Pr - Prus, Re - Reymont,  Si - Sienkiewicz,  ˙Ze - ˙Zeromski.  
Ko Kr La Or Pr Re Si ˙Ze 
Ko .73 .00 .00 .00 .00 .06 .03 .18 
Kr .00 .80 .00 .12 .00 .00 .05 .03 
La .00 .00 1.0 .00 .00 .00 .00 .00 
Or .00 .15 .00 .83 .00 .00 .01 .01 
Pr .00 .00 .00 .00 1.0 .00 .00 .00 
Re .04 .00 .00 .00 .00 .77 .02 .17 
Si .00 .05 .00 .00 .04 .01 .90 .00 
˙Ze .01 .15 .00 .00 .00 .03 .02 .79 
the most frequent  ones; one may anticipate  that in a language  whose grammar  imposes  stronger  conditions  on their usage 
and order, there is less room for the diversity  related  to an individual  writing  style. In such a case, more words need to 
be included  into an analysis  to obtain reliable  accuracy  of the authorship  classiﬁcation.  Inﬂection,  on the other hand, leads 
to the increase  of the number  of words that are treated  as distinct  - as during the construction  of networks  the words 
are not lemmatized.  If one constructs  the weighted  word-adjacency  networks  from the English  and Polish texts samples  of 
equal length,  these networks  will have the same sum of edges’ weights,  but the network  corresponding  to a Polish text will 
have more vertices.  Since word-adjacency  networks  are connected  (every vertex is reachable  from any other vertex)  and 
have edge weights  expressed  by natural  numbers,  it can be hypothesized  that from two weighted  networks  with the same 

T. Stanisz, J. Kwapie ´n and S. Dro ˙zd ˙z / Information  Sciences 482 (2019) 301–320 317 
sum of edges’ weights,  the network  with the larger number  of vertices  should generally  have more low-weight  edges and 
therefore  be more similar  to an unweighted  network.  If so, the weighted  and the unweighted  characteristics  of networks  
should differ less for the Polish texts than for the English  ones, as observed.  It must be remembered,  however,  that the 
presented  explanations  can only be treated  as suppositions;  determining  the relationship  between  the two discussed  effects 
and the attributes  of the languages,  in a reliable  way, would require  a separate  analysis  which is beyond  the scope of this 
paper. 
4. Summary  
The presented  results conﬁrm  the usability  of complex  networks  as a representation  of natural  language.  Though  simple 
in construction  and intuitive,  they carry within their structure  exploitable  information  on the underlying  language  sam- 
ple. Constructing  such networks  from English  and Polish literary  texts and studying  their properties  have led to the pos- 
sibility of distinguishing  individual  writing  styles. The fact that the presented  approach  works well for both Polish and 
English  texts suggests  that it can probably  be treated  as applicable  to a vast group of languages  - as Polish and English  
are examples  of the languages  substantially  different  from each other, in terms of the origin, morphology,  and grammar  
features.  
It can be observed  that the vectors  representing  texts belonging  to the same author have a noticeable  tendency  to group 
together  in the space of global network  characteristics,  both in the case of unweighted  and weighted  networks.  Investigating  
this tendency,  by employing  decision  tree ensembles  to perform  the classiﬁcation  of texts with respect  to authorship  and 
with network  parameters  as attributes,  results in the classiﬁcation  accuracy  higher than the accuracy  of a random  choice;  
nevertheless,  it is rather questionable  to state that the global properties  of networks  are able to distinguish  between  authors  
effectively  (at least within the studied  set of texts). The networks’  property  of having different  global parameters  for texts 
with different  authorship,  that is observed  for selected  groups  of authors  ( Fig. 6 ), becomes  much less evident  as the number  
of authors  grows. This suggests  that the global features  of word-adjacency  networks  are to a considerable  extent universal  
for the language  and non-speciﬁc  to individual  language  users. 
However,  a division  of the set of texts into subsets  consisting  of works of the same author is possible  by analysing  the 
local properties  of networks.  Calculating  the vertex parameters  corresponding  to the several  most frequent  words (or punc- 
tuation  marks),  creating  a vector of these parameters  for each text, and applying  the clustering  or classiﬁcation  algorithm  
allows for the evident  separation  of the texts with respect  to their authorship.  Among  the studied  network  characteristics,  
the vertex strength  and the weighted  clustering  coeﬃcient  (in an appropriately  normalized  form) turn out to be the most 
effective  in capturing  individual  language  features,  for both the English  and the Polish texts. Data clustering  in the clustering  
coeﬃcient’s  space for only the 12 most frequent  words (including  punctuation  marks)  reveals  the emergence  of text groups  
that clearly can be related  to particular  authors.  The classiﬁcation  with the decision  tree ensembles  results in obtaining  the 
average  accuracy  of around  85–90%.  This conﬁrms  that the attributes  of selected  vertices  in a word-adjacency  network  can 
be treated  to a large extent as typical to an individual  style. As these attributes  describe  a given vertex along with its net- 
work neighbourhood,  it can be concluded  that they are able to capture  the speciﬁc  way the individual  authors  use particular  
words and punctuation  marks in their writing.  
One could argue that because  the vertex strength  is directly  related  to the word frequency,  and because  various  lo- 
cal characteristics  may be correlated  with vertex strength,  the method  of distinguishing  between  the authors,  based on an 
analysis  of these characteristics,  does not differ signiﬁcantly  from the basic approach  to authorship  attribution,  relying  on 
comparing  word frequencies.  However,  it must be remembered  that in order to eliminate  purely frequency-based  effects on 
the characteristics  other than vertex strength,  all the studied  quantities  are normalized.  This is done by relating  character-  
istics’ values to the average  values in the networks  corresponding  to randomized  texts. It may therefore  be stated that the 
analysis  of word frequencies  and the analysis  of network  parameters  are distinct;  also, the fact that network  parameters  
and word frequencies  combined  lead to the classiﬁcation  results better than the results for any of them studied  separately  
indicates  that both these types of text features  carry complementary,  non-redundant  information.  
From a practical  perspective,  the correspondence  between  the text authorship  and the structure  of the word-adjacency  
network  seems to be potentially  useful when combined  with other lexical features  of the text. As mentioned  above, the 
accuracy  of the classiﬁcation  involving  word frequencies  (which  do not have to be treated  as the network  parameters)  and 
clustering  coeﬃcients  (which  are purely network-based)  achieves  the results better than the results obtained  from the two 
methods  separately;  with such an approach  it turns out to be suﬃcient  to select only 4–5 words to get an average  of 80% of 
the correct  classiﬁcations.  When dealing  with the problem  of authorship  attribution  in textual  data sets where the number  
of words available  for analysis  is somehow  limited,  it may be proﬁtable  to combine  the extraction  of the basic text features  
with the network  analysis,  especially  since it requires  little preprocessing.  
It is worth noting that the presented  approach  to explore  the diversity  of language  styles is very simple and straightfor-  
ward - it relies on studying  the characteristics  of a few most frequent  words and punctuation  marks. In a future study, 
it would be recommended  to examine  the possibility  of word selection  by the criteria  other than frequency,  and also 
to investigate  whether  there are other features  of language  that can be captured  by studying  the structure  of linguistic  
networks.  

318 T. Stanisz, J. Kwapie ´n and S. Dro ˙zd ˙z / Information  Sciences 482 (2019) 301–320 
Appendix  A 
Tables A.1 and A.2 . 
Table A.1 
The set of English books studied in this paper. Usual words and punctuation  marks are listed separately,  although  they are treated in the same way during 
the analysis. Average length of a sentence  is the average number of words between  punctuation  marks denoting  the end of a sentence  (full stop, question  
mark, exclamation  mark, ellipsis). 
Author Title Year of 
publishing  Number of words 
(in thousands)  Number of 
punctuation  marks 
(in thousands)  Number of 
sentences  (in 
thousands)  Average length 
of a sentence  
Arthur Conan Doyle 
(1859–1930)  Micah Clarke 1888 178.1 23.8 9.2 19.3 
The Adventures  of Sherlock Holmes 1892 104.6 15.0 6.9 15.1 
The Exploits of Brigadier  Gerard 1896 74.7 9.8 4.0 18.6 
The Lost World 1912 75.8 10.2 4.5 17.0 
The Refugees 1893 122.9 17.3 7.8 15.8 
The Valley of Fear 1915 57.7 8.3 4.3 13.5 
Charles Dickens 
(1812–1870)  A Tale of Two Cities 1859 136.2 23.2 7.8 17.5 
Barnaby Rudge 1841 254.0 44.3 12.7 20.0 
David Copperﬁeld  1850 356.0 63.0 19.5 18.3 
Oliver Twist 1838 157.7 29.4 9.2 17.2 
The Mystery of Edwin Drood 1870 96.0 16.6 5.7 16.9 
The Pickwick Papers 1837 300.3 55.6 16.4 18.3 
Daniel 
Defoe(1660–1731)  Colonel Jack 1722 141.4 20.6 4.2 33.6 
Memoirs of a Cavalier 1720 101.2 13.8 2.6 39.5 
Roxana: The Fortunate  Mistress 1724 160.9 23.4 3.8 41.9 
Moll Flanders 1722 136.2 18.9 3.2 42.1 
Robinson  Crusoe 1719 232.3 34.0 4.1 56.6 
Captain Singleton  1720 110.8 16.1 2.4 47.0 
George Eliot 
(1819–1880)  Adam Bede 1859 215.1 28.0 9.0 24.0 
Daniel Deronda 1876 311.1 39.2 14.3 21.7 
Felix Holt, the Radical 1866 182.2 24.1 8.1 22.6 
Middlemarch  1872 318.1 41.2 14.9 21.3 
Romola 1863 227.9 29.5 9.1 25.0 
The Mill on the Floss 1860 207.3 30.5 9.0 23.1 
George Orwell 
(1903–1950)  Animal Farm 1945 30.1 3.8 1.6 18.3 
Burmese Days 1934 97.7 15.1 7.4 13.2 
Coming up for Air 1939 82.8 10.4 5.3 15.7 
Down and Out in Paris and London 1933 66.8 9.9 4.0 16.5 
Keep the Aspidistra  Flying 1936 87.1 14.3 7.8 11.2 
Nineteen Eighty-Four  1949 103.7 14.2 6.7 15.5 
Jane Austen 
(1775–1817)  Emma 1815 160.3 26.5 8.6 18.5 
Mansﬁeld  Park 1814 159.8 22.5 6.9 23.0 
Northanger  Abbey 1818 77.3 11.4 3.6 21.4 
Persuasion  1818 83.3 12.4 3.7 22.8 
Pride and Prejudice  1813 121.8 17.2 6.0 20.3 
Sense and Sensibility  1811 119.5 18.0 5.2 23.0 
Joseph Conrad 
(1857–1924)  An Outcast of the Islands 1896 104.4 18.0 8.8 11.9 
Chance: A Tale in Two Parts 1913 137.4 18.3 9.6 14.4 
Lord Jim 1900 129.3 20.4 8.9 14.5 
Nostromo:  A Tale of the Seaboard  1904 168.3 24.3 10.1 16.7 
Under Western Eyes 1911 112.8 16.9 8.6 13.1 
Victory: An Island Tale 1915 114.8 18.3 8.6 13.4 
Mark Twain 
(1835–1910)  Following  the Equator 1897 186.7 26.1 9.2 20.3 
Life on the Mississippi  1883 143.9 21.1 6.8 21.2 
The Adventures  of Huckleberry  Finn 1884 110.8 16.9 5.9 18.8 
The Adventures  of Tom Sawyer 1876 70.5 11.6 4.9 14.4 
The Innocents  Abroad 1869 192.4 25.4 8.8 22.0 
The Prince and the Pauper 1882 67.2 10.8 3.3 20.1 

T. Stanisz, J. Kwapie ´n and S. Dro ˙zd ˙z / Information  Sciences 482 (2019) 301–320 319 
Table A.2 
The set of Polish books studied in this paper. Usual words and punctuation  marks are listed separately,  although  they are treated in the same way during 
the analysis. Average length of a sentence  is the average number of words between  punctuation  marks denoting  the end of a sentence  (full stop, question  
mark, exclamation  mark, ellipsis). 
Author Title Year of 
publishing  Number of words 
(in thousands)  Number of 
punctuation  marks 
(in thousands)  Number of 
sentences  (in 
thousands)  Average length 
of a sentence  
Bolesław  Prus (1847–1912)  Anielka 1885 46.6 11.6 5.7 8.2 
Dzieci 1909 66.1 19.1 9.1 7.3 
Emancypantki  1894 249.2 63.5 30.2 8.3 
Faraon 1897 193.3 45.8 19.7 9.8 
Lalka 1890 246.4 61.2 28.2 8.7 
Placówka  1886 68.6 17.5 7.7 8.9 
Eliza Orzeszkowa  (1841–1910)  Cham 1888 59.4 14.2 4.4 13.4 
Dziurdziowie  1885 50.6 10.8 3.7 13.8 
J ¸e dza 1891 40.1 9.9 3.7 11.0 
Marta 1873 62.1 12.5 4.5 13.8 
Meir Ezofowicz  1878 97.3 18.4 6.9 14.1 
Nad Niemnem  1888 164.4 32.6 11.8 14.0 
Henryk Sienkiewicz  (1846–1916)  Ogniem i mieczem 1884 239.0 51.9 19.4 12.3 
Potop 1886 380.4 84.7 32.8 11.6 
Quo Vadis 1896 168.3 34.1 11.4 14.7 
Rodzina Połanieckich  1894 210.2 47.3 15.1 13.9 
W pustyni i w puszczy 1912 99.5 18.1 6.5 15.2 
Wiry 1910 92.7 20.0 6.6 14.0 
Jan Lam (1838–1886)  Dziwne karyery 1881 70.9 14.8 4.7 15.2 
Humoreski  1883 37.6 7.5 2.3 16.4 
Ideali ´sci 1876 100.9 21.3 7.0 14.5 
Koroniarz  w Galicyi 1870 62.0 11.6 3.3 18.9 
Rozmaito  ´sci i powiastki  1878 52.4 10.3 2.6 20.0 
Wielki ´swiat Capowic 1869 37.7 6.7 1.6 23.0 
Janusz Korczak (1879–1942)  Bankructwo  małego D ˙zeka 1924 41.7 10.3 4.3 9.6 
Dzieci ulicy 1901 50.2 13.2 5.9 8.5 
Dziecko salonu 1906 54.1 16.7 6.3 8.6 
Kajtu ´s czarodziej  1934 46.0 17.9 9.8 4.7 
Król Maciu ´s na wyspie bezludnej  1923 45.9 12.1 5.2 8.8 
Król Maciu ´s Pierwszy 1923 67.0 15.1 6.2 10.8 
Józef Ignacy Kraszewski  
(1812–1887)  Barani Ko ˙zuszek 1898 60.3 14.8 5.5 11.0 
Bo ˙za opieka 1873 51.3 11.9 4.9 10.5 
Bo ˙zy gniew 1886 112.0 24.9 7.8 14.4 
Bracia rywale 1877 42.0 10.5 3.8 11.1 
Infantka 1884 111.3 23.2 8.2 13.6 
Złote jabłko 1853 107.5 22.6 9.7 11.1 
Stefan ˙Zeromski (1846–1925)  Dzieje grzechu 1908 148.5 35.0 15.9 9.3 
Ludzie bezdomni  1900 97.2 20.2 8.6 11.3 
Popioły 1902 222.4 46.5 21.0 10.6 
Przedwio  ´snie 1924 81.3 17.5 7.3 11.2 
Syzyfowe  prace 1897 61.9 11.6 4.5 13.7 
Wierna rzeka 1912 39.5 8.6 4.0 9.8 
Władysław  Reymont  (1867–1925)  Bunt 1924 40.2 9.0 3.8 10.6 
Fermenty  1897 117.9 30.9 9.8 12.0 
Lili 1899 25.0 6.3 2.2 11.6 
Marzyciel  1910 47.7 11.9 4.4 10.8 
Wampir 1911 53.0 13.0 4.5 11.7 
Ziemia obiecana  1899 170.9 38.0 13.3 12.9 
References  
[1] C. Akimushkin,  D.R. Amancio,  O.N. Oliveira, Text authorship  identiﬁed  using the dynamics  of word co-occurrence  networks,  PLOS ONE 12 (1) (2017), 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0170527  . 
[2] D. Amancio,  M. Nunes, O. Oliveira, T. Pardo, L. Antiqueira,  L. da F. Costa, Using metrics from complex networks  to evaluate machine  translation,  Physica 
A 390 (1) (2011), doi: 10.1016/j.physa.2010.08.052  . 
[3] L. Antiqueira,  O.N. Oliveira, L. da Fontoura  Costa, M. das Graças Volpe Nunes, A complex network approach  to text summarization,  Inf. Sci. 179 (5) 
(2009), doi: 10.1016/j.ins.2008.10.032  . 
[4] S. Arlot, A. Celisse, A survey of cross-validation  procedures  for model selection,  Stat. Surv. 4 (2010), doi: 10.1214/09-ss054  . 
[5] M. Ausloos, Generalized  Hurst exponent  and multifractal  function of original and translated  texts mapped into frequency  and length time series, Phys. 
Rev. E 86 (3) (2012), doi: 10.1103/physreve.86.031108  . 
[6] A. Barrat, M. Barthelemy,  R. Pastor-Satorras,  A. Vespignani,  The architecture  of complex weighted  networks,  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 101 (11) (2004), 
doi: 10.1073/pnas.040  0 087101 . 
[7] V.D. Blondel, J.-L. Guillaume,  R. Lambiotte,  E. Lefebvre,  Fast unfolding  of communities  in large networks,  J. Stat. Mech. 2008 (10) (2008), doi: 10.1088/ 
1742-5468/2008/10/p10008  . 

320 T. Stanisz, J. Kwapie ´n and S. Dro ˙zd ˙z / Information  Sciences 482 (2019) 301–320 
[8] S. Boccaletti,  V. Latora, Y. Moreno, M. Chavez, D. Hwang, Complex  networks:  structure  and dynamics,  Phys. Rep. 424 (4–5) (2006), doi: 10.1016/j.  
physrep.20  05.10.0 09 . 
[9] B. de Boer, Self-organization  and language  evolution,  The Oxford Handbook  of Language  Evolution,  Oxford University  Press, 2011, doi: 10.1093/oxfordhb/  
9780199541119.013.0063  . 
[10] M. Chatzigeorgiou,  V. Constantoudis,  F. Diakonos,  K. Karamanos,  C. Papadimitriou,  M. Kalimeri,  H. Papageorgiou,  Multifractal  correlations  in natural 
language  written texts: effects of language  family and long word statistics,  Physica A 469 (2017), doi: 10.1016/j.physa.2016.11.028  . 
[11] L. Dall’Asta,  A. Baronchelli,  Microscopic  activity patterns in the naming game, J. Phys. A 39 (48) (2006), doi: 10.1088/0305-4470/39/48/002  . 
[12] S. Dro ˙zd ˙z, A. Kulig, J. Kwapie ´n, A. Niewiarowski,  M. Stanuszek,  Hierarchical  organization  of H. Eugene Stanley scientiﬁc  collaboration  community  in 
weighted  network representation,  J. Informetrics  11 (4) (2017), doi: 10.1016/j.joi.2017.09.009  . 
[13] S. Dro ˙zd ˙z, P. O ´swi ¸e cimka, A. Kulig, J. Kwapie ´n, K. Bazarnik,  I. Grabska-Gradzi  ´nska, J. Rybicki, M. Stanuszek,  Quantifying  origin and character  of long- 
range correlations  in narrative  texts, Inf. Sci. 331 (2016), doi: 10.1016/j.ins.2015.10.023  . 
[14] L. Egghe, Untangling  Herdan’s  law and Heaps’ law: mathematical  and informetric  arguments,  J. Am. Soc. Inf.Sci. Technol. 58 (5) (2007), doi: 10.1002/  
asi.20524  . 
[15] L. da F. Costa, F.A. Rodrigues,  G. Travieso,  P.R.V. Boas, Characterization  of complex networks:  a survey of measurements,  Adv. Phys. 56 (1) (2007), 
doi: 10.1080/0  0 018730601170527  . 
[16] M. Faloutsos,  P. Faloutsos,  C. Faloutsos,  On power-law  relationships  of the internet topology,  in: Proceedings  of the conference  on Applications,  tech- 
nologies,  architectures,  and protocols  for computer  communication  - SIGCOMM’99,  ACM Press, 1999, doi: 10.1145/316188.316229  . 
[17] I. Grabska-Gradzi  ´nska, A. Kulig, J. Kwapie ´n, S. Dro ˙zd ˙z, Complex  networks  analysis of literary and scientiﬁc  texts, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 23 (07) (2012), 
doi: 10.1142/s0129183112500519  . 
[18] R. van der Hofstad, Random Graphs and Complex  Networks,  Cambridge  University  Press, 2016, doi: 10.1017/9781316779422  . 
[19] A. Kalampokis,  K. Kosmidis,  P. Argyrakis,  Evolution  of vocabulary  on scale-free  and random networks,  Physica A 379 (2) (2007), doi: 10.1016/j.physa.  
2006.12.048  . 
[20] M. Koppel, J. Schler, S. Argamon,  Computational  methods  in authorship  attribution,  J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol. 60 (1) (2009), doi: 10.1002/asi.20961  . 
[21] A. Kulig, S. Dro ˙zd ˙z, J. Kwapie ´n, P. O ´swi ¸e cimka, Modeling  the average shortest-path  length in growth of word-adjacency  networks,  Phys. Rev. E 91 (3) 
(2015), doi: 10.1103/physreve.91.032810  . 
[22] A. Kulig, J. Kwapie ´n, T. Stanisz, S. Dro ˙zd ˙z, In narrative  texts punctuation  marks obey the same statistics  as words, Inf. Sci. 375 (2017), doi: 10.1016/j.ins.  
2016.09.051  . 
[23] J. Kwapie ´n, S. Dro ˙zd ˙z, Physical approach  to complex systems, Phys. Rep. 515 (3–4) (2012), doi: 10.1016/j.physrep.2012.01.007  . 
[24] T. Lansdall-Welfare,  S. Sudhahar,  J. Thompson,  J. Lewis, N.C. and, Content analysis of 150 years of British periodicals,  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 114 (4) 
(2017), doi: 10.1073/pnas.1606380114  . 
[25] T. Lansdall-Welfare,  S. Sudhahar,  G.A. Veltri, N. Cristianini,  On the coverage  of science in the media: a big data study on the impact of the Fukushima  
disaster, in: 2014 IEEE International  Conference  on Big Data (Big Data), IEEE, 2014, doi: 10.1109/bigdata.2014.7004454  . 
[26] C. Leung, H. Chau, Weighted  assortative  and disassortative  networks  model, Physica A 378 (2) (2007), doi: 10.1016/j.physa.2006.12.022  . 
[27] H. Liu, F. Hu, What role does syntax play in a language  network?  EPL (Europhys.  Lett.) 83 (1) (2008), doi: 10.1209/0295-5075/83/18002  . 
[28] H. Liu, C. Xu, Can syntactic  networks  indicate morphological  complexity  of a language?  EPL (Europhys.  Lett.) 93 (2) (2011), doi: 10.1209/0295-5075/93/  
28005 . 
[29] D. Madigan  , A. Genkin , D.D. Lewis , S. Argamon  , D. Fradkin , L. Ye , Author identiﬁcation  on the large scale, in: In Proc. of the Meeting of the Classiﬁcation  
Society of North America,  2005 . 
[30] A . Mehri, A .H. Darooneh,  A . Shariati, The complex networks  approach  for authorship  attribution  of books, Physica A 391 (7) (2012), doi: 10.1016/j.  
physa.2011.12.011  . 
[31] J.-B. Michel, Y.K. Shen, A.P. Aiden, A. Veres, M.K. Gray, J.P. Pickett, D. Hoiberg, D. Clancy, P. Norvig, J. Orwant, S. Pinker, M.A . Nowak, E.L.A . and, 
Quantitative  analysis of culture using millions of digitized  books, Science 331 (6014) (2010), doi: 10.1126/science.1199644  . 
[32] R.F. Mihalcea,  D.R. Radev, Graph-based  Natural Language  Processing  and Information  Retrieval,  1st, Cambridge  University  Press, New York, NY, USA, 
2011, doi: 10.1017/cbo9780511976247  . 
[33] T. Neal, K. Sundararajan,  A. Fatima, Y. Yan, Y. Xiang, D. Woodard,  Surveying  stylometry  techniques  and applications,  ACM Comput. Surv. 50 (6) (2017), 
doi: 10.1145/3132039  . 
[34] M.E.J. Newman,  The structure  and function of complex networks,  SIAM Rev. 45 (2) (2003), doi: 10.1137/s003614450342480  . 
[35] S.T. Piantadosi,  Zipf’s word frequency  law in natural language:  acritical review and future directions,  Psychonomic  Bull. Rev. 21 (5) (2014), doi: 10.3758/  
s13423- 014- 0585- 6 . 
[36] Project Gutenberg.  https://www.gutenberg.org/  , accessed:  30.03.2017.  
[37] J. Saramäki,  M. Kivelä, J.-P. Onnela, K. Kaski, J. Kertész, Generalizations  of the clustering  coeﬃcient  to weighted  complex networks,  Phys. Rev. E 75 (2) 
(2007), doi: 10.1103/physreve.75.027105  . 
[38] J. Sienkiewicz,  J.A. Hołyst, Statistical  analysis of 22 public transport  networks  in Poland, Phys. Rev. E 72 (4) (2005), doi: 10.1103/physreve.72.046127  . 
[39] E. Stamatatos,  A survey of modern authorship  attribution  methods,  J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol. 60 (3) (2009), doi: 10.1002/asi.21001  . 
[40] L. Steels, Modeling  the cultural evolution  of language,  Phys. Life Rev. 8 (4) (2011), doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2011.10.014  . 
[41] C.D. Sutton, Classiﬁcation  and regression  trees, bagging, and boosting,  Handbook  of Statistics,  Elsevier, 2005, doi: 10.1016/s0169-7161(04)24011-1  . 
[42] P.-N. Tan , M. Steinbach  , V. Kumar , Introduction  to Data Mining, Pearson, 2005 . 
[43] M. Valencia,  M.A. Pastor, M.A. Fernández-Seara,  J. Artieda, J. Martinerie,  M. Chavez, Complex  modular structure  of large-scale  brain networks,  Chaos 
Interdisciplinary  J. Nonlinear  Sci. 19 (2) (2009), doi: 10.1063/1.3129783  . 
[44] O. de Vel, A. Anderson,  M. Corney, G. Mohay, Mining e-mail content for author identiﬁcation  forensics,  ACM SIGMOD Rec. 30 (4) (2001), doi: 10.1145/ 
604264.604272  . 
[45] Wikisource,  The Free Library. https://wikisource.org/  , accessed:  30.03.2017.  
[46] Wolne Lektury. https://wolnelektury.pl/  , accessed:  30.03.2017.  
[47] T. Yang, C. Gu, H. Yang, Long-range  correlations  in sentence  series from ‘a story of the stone’, PLOS ONE 11 (9) (2016), doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.  
0162423 . 
[48] Y. Yang, C. Gu, Q. Xiao, H. Yang, Evolution  of scaling behaviors  embedded  in sentence  series from ‘a story of the stone’, PLOS ONE 12 (2) (2017), 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0171776  . 
[49] R. Zheng, J. Li, H. Chen, Z. Huang, A framework  for authorship  identiﬁcation  of online messages:  writing-style  features and classiﬁcation  techniques,  J. 
Am. Soc. Inf.Sci. Technol. 57 (3) (2006), doi: 10.1002/asi.20316  . 

